<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">
<TEI.2 lang="en">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title>As Others Saw Him</title>
                <author><name reg="Jacobs, Joseph">Joseph Jacobs</name></author>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
                <date value="2015-05-16">May 16, 2015</date>
                <idno type='etext-no'>48974</idno>
                <availability>
                  <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere
                  at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever.
                  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
                  the terms of the Project Gutenberg License online at
                  www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
                </availability>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <bibl>
<title>As Others Saw Him</title>
                <author><name reg="Jacobs, Joseph">Joseph Jacobs</name></author>
<imprint><pubPlace>Boston and New York</pubPlace>
<publisher>Houghton, Mifflin and Company</publisher>
<date>1895</date>
</imprint>
</bibl>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
        <encodingDesc>
        </encodingDesc>
        <profileDesc>
          <langUsage>
            <language id="he" />
            <language id="en" />
            <language id="grc"/>
          </langUsage>
        </profileDesc>
        <revisionDesc>
          <change>
            <date value="2015-05-16">May 16, 2015</date>
            <respStmt>
                <resp>Produced by <name>Shaun Pinder</name>, <name>Stefan Cramme</name>
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net 
(This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)</resp>
            </respStmt>
            <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
          </change>
        </revisionDesc>
    </teiHeader>

    <pgExtensions>
      <pgStyleSheet>
        .bold        { font-weight: bold }
        .center      { text-align: center }  
        .italic      { font-style: italic }
        .antiqua     { font-weight: bold }
        .smallcaps   { font-variant: small-caps }
        head         { text-align: center }
      </pgStyleSheet>
<pgCharMap formats="txt">
<char id="U0x2009">
          <charName>thinsp</charName>
          <desc>THIN SPACE</desc>
          <mapping></mapping>
        </char>
<!--<char id="U0x2042">
  <charName>Asterism</charName>
  <mapping>***</mapping>
</char>-->
</pgCharMap>
    </pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
<front>
<div>
<divGen type="pgheader" />
</div>
<div>
<divGen type="encodingDesc" />
</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<pgIf output="html">
<then><p rend="text-align: center"><figure url="images/cover.jpg"><figDesc>Cover image</figDesc></figure></p></then><else></else></pgIf>
<pb/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<p rend="center; font-size: large">
AS OTHERS SAW HIM
</p>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg002'/>

</div><titlePage rend="page-break-before: right; center">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg003'/>

<docTitle>
  <titlePart type="main"><hi rend="font-size: xx-large">AS OTHERS SAW HIM</hi></titlePart><lb/><lb/>
<titlePart type="sub"><hi rend='italic; font-size: x-large'>A RETROSPECT</hi></titlePart><lb/><lb/>
<titlePart type="sub"><hi rend="font-size: large">A. D. 54</hi></titlePart>
</docTitle>
<lb/><lb/>
<titlePart>“<hi rend='italic'>It cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem</hi>“</titlePart><lb/>
<titlePart>                      <hi rend='smallcaps'>Luke</hi> xiii. 33</titlePart>
<lb/><lb/>
<figure url="images/illu.jpg"><figDesc>Illustration: Publisher’s sign</figDesc></figure>
<lb/><lb/>
<docImprint><pubPlace>BOSTON AND NEW YORK</pubPlace><lb/>
<publisher>HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY</publisher><lb/>
<publisher><hi rend='antiqua'>The Riverside Press, Cambridge</hi></publisher><lb/>
<docDate>1895</docDate>
</docImprint>

</titlePage>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg004'/>

<p rend="center; font-size: small">Copyright, 1895,<lb/>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>By</hi> HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN &amp; CO.
</p>

<p rend="center; font-size: small"><hi rend='italic'>All rights reserved.</hi></p>

<p rend="center; margin-top: 4; font-size: small"><hi rend='italic'>The Riverside Press, Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A.</hi><lb/>
Electrotyped and Printed by H. O. Houghton &amp; Co.</p>

</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
<!--<index index="toc" level1="Preface"/><index index="pdf" level1="Preface"/>-->
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>To Aglaophonos, Physician of the Greeks at
Corinth, Meshullam ben Zadok, a Scribe of
the Jews at Alexandria, greeting</hi>:—
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>It was a joy and a surprise to me to hear news
after many days from thee, my master and my
friend. To thee I owe whatever I have of Greek
wisdom; for when in the old days at the Holy
City thou soughtest me for instruction in our
Law, I learnt more from thee than I could impart
to thee. Since I last wrote to thee, I have
come to this great city, where many of my nation
dwell, and almost all the most learned of thy
tongue are congregated. Truly, it would please
me much, and mine only son and his wife, if thou
couldst come and take up thy sojourn among us
for a while.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Touching the man Saul of Tarsus, of whom
thou writest, I know but little. He is well instructed
in our Law, both written and oral, having
received the latter from the chief master
among those of the past generation, Gamaliel by
name. Yet he is not of the disciples of Aaron
that love peace; for when I last heard of him he
was among the leaders of a riot in which a man
was slain. And now I think thereon, I am almost
certain that the slain man was of the followers
of Jesus the Nazarene, and this Saul was
<pb/><anchor id='Pg006'/>among the bitterest against them. And yet thou
writest that the same Saul has spoken of the
Nazarene that he was a god like Apollo, that had
come down on earth for a while to live his life
among men. Truly, men’s minds are as the wind
that bloweth hither and thither.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>But as for that Jesus of Nazara, I can tell thee
much, if not all. For I was at Jerusalem all the
time he passed for a leader of men up to his
shameful death. At first I admired him for his
greatness of soul and goodness of life, but in the
end I came to see that he was a danger to our
nation, and, though unwillingly, I was of those
who voted for his death in the Council of Twenty-Three.
Yet I cannot tell thee all I know in the
compass of a letter, so I have written it at large
for thee, and it will be delivered unto thee even
with this letter. And in my description of events
I have been at pains to distinguish between what
I saw myself and what I heard from others, following
in this the example of Herodotus of Halicarnassus,
who, if he spake rude Greek, wrote
true history. And so farewell.</hi>
</p>
</div>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
<index index="toc" level1="Contents"/><index index="pdf" level1="Contents"/>
<head>CONTENTS.</head>

<table rend="tblcolumns: 'r lw(50m) r'; latexcolumns: 'rp{6cm}r'">
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right"></cell>
<cell></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><hi rend="font-size: small">PAGE</hi></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">I.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Man with the Scourge</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg009">9</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">II.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Upbringing</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg021">21</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">III.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Earlier Teaching. Sermon in the Synagogue of the Galilæans</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg037">37</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">IV.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Two Ways</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg055">55</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">V.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Woman taken in Adultery. The Rich Young Man</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg063">63</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">VI.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Testings in the Temple</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg075">75</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">VII.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Second Sermon</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg087">87</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">VIII.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Rebuking of Jesus</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg099">99</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">IX.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Jesus in the Temple</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg111">111</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">X.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Entry into Jerusalem</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg121">121</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XI.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Cleansing of the Temple</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg133">133</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XII.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Woes</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg145">145</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XIII.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Great Refusal</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg155">155</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XIV.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Meeting of the Hananites</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg167">167</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XV.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Examination before the Sanhedrim</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg181">181</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right">XVI.</cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Condemnation and Execution</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg195">195</ref></cell>
</row>
<row>
<cell rend="text-align: right"></cell>
<cell><hi rend='smallcaps'>Epilogue</hi></cell>
<cell rend="text-align: right"><ref target="Pg207">207</ref></cell>
</row>
</table>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
</div>
</front>
<body>
<div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
<index index="toc" level1="I. The Man with the Scourge"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="I. The Man with the Scourge"/>

<head>I.<lb/>THE MAN WITH THE SCOURGE.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg010'/>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg011'/>

<p>
I was crossing one morning the Xystus
Bridge on my way to the Temple, when I
saw issuing from the nearest gate a herd
of beasts of sacrifice. Fearing that something
untoward had occurred, I hurried to
the gate, and when I entered the Court
of the Gentiles, I found all in confusion.
The tables of the money-changers had
been overturned, and the men were gathering
their moneys from the ground. And
in the midst I saw one with a scourge in
his hand. His face was full of wrath and
scorn, his eyes blazed, and on his left temple
stood out a vein all blue, throbbing
with his passion. He was neither short
nor tall, but of sturdy figure, and clad in
rustic garb.
</p>

<p>
Now, as the money-changers were escaping
from his wrath, one of them ran
<pb n='12'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>against a little child that was in the court,
and it fell screaming. The fellow took no
heed, but went on his course. But the
man with the scourge went to the little
child and raised it to its feet, and pressed
it to his side; the hand that rested on the
curly head was that of a workman, with
broken nails, and yet the fingers twitched
with the excitement of the man. But,
looking to his face, I saw that a wonderful
change had come over it. From rage, it
had turned to pity and love; the eyes that
had flashed scorn on the money-changers
now looked down with tenderness on the
little child. I remember thinking to
myself, <q>This man cannot say the thing
that is not; his face bewrayeth him.</q>
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the money-changers and
those with them had collected together
near the gate by which I had entered, and
stood there whispering and muttering
among themselves. All at once they
turned towards the man as he was soothing
the little child, and shouted out together,
<q><foreign rend='italic'>Mamzer! Mamzer!</foreign></q> which in
our tongue signifieth one born out of
wedlock. Then the man looked up from
<pb n='13'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>the little child, his face once more full of
rage, and the blue vein throbbing on his
temple. He took a step towards the men,
and then he stopped. His face changed
to a look of pity, and the men themselves,
in fear and shame, slunk away before his
look through the gate and were gone.
</p>

<p>
Then he turned towards those that had
for sale doves as sacrifices for the women
and the poor. To these he spoke in a
tone that was calm and yet full of authority,
and then I noticed that his voice
had the burr of our northern peasantry.
He said unto them, <q>Take these things
hence; make not my Father’s house a
house of merchandise.</q> And these, too,
went away through the gates, carrying with
them the wicker cages full of doves. Ever
since that time the doves have been for
sale in Hanan’s Bazaar on the Mount of
Olives.
</p>

<p>
Now I must tell thee that at this time
there had been much disputing between
the Pharisees and the Sadducees as to the
sale of beasts for sacrifice. The Pharisees
held that each man might buy such beasts
wherever he would; but the Sadducees,
<pb n='14'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>being mainly priests, or of priestly blood,
would have it that the beasts of sacrifice
could only be purchased from the salesmen
duly authorized by the High Priest;
for they said, <q>Who shall tell that the
beasts are according to the Law, if they
are bought from any chance person?</q> Yet
many thought they only did this in order
that they might share the profit from the
sale of the animals. And, indeed, the
great riches of the High Priests came
mainly from this source. When, therefore,
I saw the man with the scourge getting
rid of these sacrificial animals from
the courts of the Temple, my first thought
was that he was of the sect of the Pharisees.
Yet these are rarely found in the
country parts, and the man bore no great
marks of special piety; his phylacteries
were not broader than my own; the
fringes of his garment were not more conspicuous,
nor did he seem as one of the
fanatics who are so many in our land. He
had done what he had done in all calmness,
and with a certain air of authority.
My wonder was aroused to think what
manner of man this could be, who did the
<pb n='15'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>work of the Pharisees, and was not one
himself.
</p>

<p>
While I thus thought, the man turned
to a group of men clad in the same rustic
garb, saying, <q>Be ye rather approved
money-changers, holding fast the good and
casting forth the false;</q><note place="foot">This, like most other utterances of Jesus, found in this
book but not in the Gospels, is also found in the early
patristic literature.—<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> and, after other
words, he turned from them and went up
the steps leading to the Women’s Court.
</p>

<p>
Now thou knowest, Aglaophonos, that
at the entrance of this court standeth an
inscription which saith, <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Let none of
alien birth pass within the Temple
cloisters: he that transgresses is
guilty of death.</hi></q> As the man with the
scourge would enter the Women’s Court,
the Roman sentry stopped him, and
pointed to this inscription with his spear.
He shook his head, saying in faulty Greek,
<q>Jewish I am,</q> and showed the soldier the
fringes of his garment after the Jewish
fashion. Then the sentry drew back, and
the man passed through.
</p>

<p>
Thereupon I went up to the men to
<pb n='16'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>whom the man with the scourge had
spoken, and greeted them with the greeting
of peace.
</p>

<p>
<q>Peace unto thee, master,</q> said one of
them in the same northern accent I had
noticed in their leader.
</p>

<p>
<q>Who is that man,</q> I said, <q>that has
just gone into the Temple cloister?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Jesus of Nazara, in Galilee.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And whose son is he?</q> I asked.
</p>

<p>
The man looked at his companions ere
he answered,—
</p>

<p>
<q>Of Joseph ben Eli the carpenter, and
Miriam his wife.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And what is his trade?</q> I continued.
</p>

<p>
<q>A wheelwright,</q> he said; <q>the best
wheels and yokes in all Capernaum are
made by him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But is he of the country-folk,<note place="foot"><foreign rend="font-style: normal" lang="grc">Ὄχλος τοῦ ἀγροῦ</foreign>, 
seemingly the translation of the Hebrew <foreign rend="font-style: normal" lang="he">עם הארץ</foreign>
used for those unlearned in the Law;
this term seems to have passed through much the same
history as <q>pagan.</q>—<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> or a
pupil of the wise?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay, master, he knoweth the Law and
the Prophets.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Of what party is he? Boethusian he
<pb n='17'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>cannot be, nor Sadducee; but is he Pharisee
or Zealot, Essene or Baptist?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He is of no party.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But from whom hath he received the
tradition of the elders? At whose feet has
he sat? Whom calleth he master?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He hath been baptized by Jochanan his
kinsman, but none calleth he master.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>If he have not the tradition, he cannot
teach the Law, for his words will not be
binding. Doth he sit in judgment or pronounce
<foreign rend='italic'>Din</foreign>?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay, master, he but teacheth us to be
good.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah,</q> said I, <q>he is but a homolist
of the Hagada; he addeth naught to the
<foreign rend='italic'>Halacha</foreign>. Then what is his motto?</q><note place="foot">Each of the Jewish rabbis used to sum up his teaching
in some pregnant sentence. These are given in the
Talmudic treatise, <hi rend='italic'>The Ethics of the Fathers</hi>.—<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
<q>He saith, <q>Repent ye, for the kingdom
of heaven is at hand.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
Then I took the man away from his companions,
and out of hearing of the Roman
sentry, and asked him in a low tone, <q>And
who shall be the king thereof?</q>
</p>

<p>
But the man answered not, but said
only, <q>Lo! he cometh.</q>
</p>

<pb n='18'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>

<p>
And, indeed, at that moment Jesus came
down by the steps he had ascended and
beckoned to his companions. And as they
went towards him I was surprised, and at
the same time horrified, to see amongst
them two persons whom I little thought to
find in any public place in Jerusalem, still
less in the courts of the Temple. One was
a woman in the yellow veil of a <foreign rend='italic'>hetæra</foreign>;
the other, a mere <foreign rend='italic'>Nathin</foreign> who had no
name among men, but was called <hi rend='italic'>Dog o’
Dogs</hi>. These two pressed close to Jesus;
the woman rushed forward with a sob and
raised the hem of his garment to her lips,
while to the man he spoke some friendly
words, smiling on him as they walked towards
the entrance.
</p>

<p>
I was astonished. The man had seemed
so careful of the purity of the Temple that
he would not allow even the necessary
arrangements for its service to be performed
in its precincts, yet he allowed its
courts to be defiled by the vilest of the
vile. Perchance, I thought, he had prevailed
upon them to perform the vows
enjoined by the Law, and cleanse themselves
of their sin. Or was it that he was
<pb n='19'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>ignorant of their characters, being but newly
come from rural parts? He must, indeed,
be different from other rabbis, who kept
themselves apart from all transgressors
against the Law till they had repented and
done penance.
</p>

<p>
While I thus meditated, I saw the High
Priest Hanan, whom ye Hellenes call Annas,
enter into the court of the Gentiles with his
guard. Thou rememberest the man, Aglaophonos—how
his tyranny extended over
all the city. He was still called High Priest,
though Valerius Gratius, the Procurator,
had deposed him years before, lest haply he
might regain the regal power of the Maccabæans.
Still, even after his deposition,
he had sufficient power to get his sons or
sons-in-law named High Priests. It was
one of the latter, Joseph Caiaphas, who at
that time held the office; yet the people
still called Hanan High Priest, and he himself
wore on high days the bells and pomegranates
round his tunic as a sign of his
dignity. Thou must remember his keen-cut
face, his nose like an eagle’s, his long
white beard, bent neck, and sinewy hand.
Was it thou or I that first called him <q>the
Old Vulture</q>?
</p>

<pb n='20'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>

<p>
He had heard of the insult to his dignity
by the removal, without his orders, of the
money-changers and others to whom the
people paid the fees from which he and his
made such display in his grand dwelling
on the Mount of Olives. <q>Where is he?
where is he?</q> he cried, as he came bustling
up, with neck extended, and looking
more than ever like a bird of prey. He
soon found that the man he sought had
gone; but he had given his orders, and
before I left the court, I saw the money-changers
reënter and the cattle driven
back. I had to attend a meeting of the
Sanhedrim, for that year I had risen to the
third and highest bench of disciples who
sit under its members when they give judgment.
Next year I was elected of the Seventy-One
myself in the section of Israelites.
It must, therefore, have been in the sixteenth
year of Tiberius the Emperor,
nearly five-and-twenty years agone, that I
thus saw for the first time Jesus the Nazarene.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
<index index="toc" level1="II. The Upbringing"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="II. The Upbringing"/>
<head>II.<lb/>THE UPBRINGING.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg022'/>

<pb n='23'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>

<p>
Thou canst imagine the wonder and
excitement in Jerusalem at this bold deed
of the Nazarene. Not even the oracle of
Delphi is regarded with so much reverence
as our sacred fane, and none in our
time had dared to interfere with its regulations,
which have all the sacredness of
our traditions. And of these none was
regarded by the priestly guardians of the
Temple as of greater weight for them than
the right of sale of beasts of sacrifice. It
is from this, as I have said, that the priestly
order gain their wealth, and no more deadly
blow could be struck at their power than
to deprive them of this. Hence had the
Pharisees protested against this right, but
none had hitherto dared to carry out the
protest in very deed. All the poor and
all the pious would have been glad if they
could buy their offerings to the Lord
wheresoever they would.
</p>

<p>
But more than all, men of Jerusalem
<pb n='24'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>were amazed at the daring of the Galilæan
stranger in opposing the High Priest Hanan.
This man had been the tyrant of
the Temple and of the city for the whole
span of a generation of men, and no man
had dared say him nay for all that time.
Even the Romans, who had deposed him
from his position as High Priest, had not
dared to interfere with him otherwise. Yet
had this rude countryman, who had never
been seen, never been known to set foot in
Jerusalem before, dared to strike at the
root of his power and wealth. Thou canst
not wonder that men were curious to know
what manner of man he might be who
had dared this great thing, and busy
rumor ran through all the bazaars of
Jerusalem, asking, Who is this Jesus of
Nazara? All that I learnt of his kindred
and early life I learnt at this time, and I
here set it forth in order.
</p>

<p>
It was natural that I should first direct
my inquiries as to his birth, for the insulting
cry of the money-changers still rang
in my ears. Thou knowest our pride of
birth; I learnt from thee to abate it.
Every man in Israel taketh his place in
<pb n='25'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>the nation according as he is a son of
Aaron or of Levi, a simple Israelite, or a
proselyte that fears the Lord; each man
knoweth his own and his neighbor’s genealogy.
The greatest slur upon a man is
to accuse him of <q>mixture,</q> the greatest
insult is to call him <q>bastard.</q> Why had
the money-changers cast this slur upon the
Nazarene? Thou and I, Aglaophonos,
who boast to be citizens of the Kosmos,
would not think the worse of him if the
taunt were true. Yet thou canst understand
how great, even if he only thought
it to be true, would be the influence of
such a slur on this mans mind and on
his career. If in after-days he showed
himself so careless of the nation’s hopes,
may it not have been that he felt himself
in some way outside the nation?
</p>

<p>
Now I found, upon inquiry among the
Galilæans settled in Jerusalem, that some
such scandal had arisen about his birth.
There had even been talk that Joseph ben
Eli would have put away his wife, but for
the stern penalties which our Law inflicts
upon the misdoer. Yet there may have
been naught but suspicion in the matter,
<pb n='26'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>for the two lived together, and Miriam
bore several children to Joseph after this
Jesus. But between him and them there
was never good will, and I have heard
things told of this Jesus which seem to
show some harshness in his treatment
of them, and even of his mother. Once
when he was told that his mother and
brethren were without, and would see
him, he as it were repudiated them, saying,
<q>Who are my mother and my brothers?
Whosoever doeth the will of God, the
same is my brother and sister and mother.</q>
Again, when once his mother
came to him and would speak to him, he
said to her, <q>Woman, what have I to do
with thee?</q> The man whom I had seen
so tenderly thoughtful to a little child
could not have spoken thus unless he had
felt himself placed by some means outside
the natural ties of men.
</p>

<p>
Of Jesus’ upbringing I could learn little.
When he was at the age of thirteen, when
each Jewish male child becomes a Son of
the Covenant (<foreign rend='italic'>Bar Mitzva</foreign>), and, as we
think, takes his sins upon his own soul, his
parents brought him to Jerusalem. On
<pb n='27'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>this occasion, as some still remember, he
showed remarkable knowledge of the Law,
when, as is customary, they read the portion
of the Law set down for the Sabbath
reading next after his birthday, and he
was examined in its meaning by the
learned men present. Yet he fulfilled
not this promise of devotion to the Law
as he grew in years. I cannot learn that
he dusted himself with the <q>dust of the
wise,</q> as the sages have commanded.<note place="foot">José ben Joeser said, <q>Let thy place be a place of
meeting for the wise; dust thyself with the dust of their
feet, and drink greedily of their teaching</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>Pirke Aboth</foreign>,
i. 4).—<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note>
Not having sat at the feet of any of the
holders of tradition, he could not pronounce
decisions of the Law.
</p>

<p>
His father brought him up to his own
trade, that of carpenter. With us manual
toil is not despised, as among you
Hellenes; there is a saying among us,
<q>Whoso bringeth not his son up to a
handicraft traineth him for a robber.</q>
Jesus was a good and capable worker, and
devoted himself especially to the making
of yokes and wheels at Capernaum, where
<pb n='28'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>he had settled, some five hours’ journey
from his native place. Here he would
often read the <foreign rend='italic'>Haphtaroth</foreign>, or prophetical
lessons, in the synagogue, and explain it
after the manner of the Hagada.
</p>

<p>
Thus he would have passed his life, a
wheelwright on week-days, a preacher on
the Sabbath and festivals, but for a strange
event that occurred in his own family.
Among us Jews, none has more honor
than the <foreign rend='italic'>Nabi</foreign>, the man who speaks the
word of wisdom in the name of God.
How know we that a man is a Nabi?
Chiefly by his words, but mainly by his
eyes, in which there shines the light of
prophecy. Now, when Jesus was about
thirty years old, three or four years before
I first saw him, the light of prophecy came
in the eyes of his cousin, Jochanan ben
Zacharia Ha-Cohen. Thou knowest, Aglaophonos,
that amongst us there is a sect
of Essenoi, who answer in much to the
Pythagoreans among the Hellenes. These
Essenoi eat no flesh, they dwell not in the
cities of men, they perform frequent lustrations,
nor will they admit any into their
community until they have been baptized
<pb n='29'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>of them; they care little for the Temple
service, and in this above all distinguish
themselves from either Pharisees or Sadducees.
Their belief in the angels is
strong, and they use magic for the healing
of sickness.
</p>

<p>
Now, this Jochanan, the cousin of Jesus,
seems to have adopted in many things the
views of these Essenoi: he separated himself
from men, and ate no flesh, nor did he
go up to the Temple on the three great
festivals of the year; and above all, when
men began to follow after him, he would
admit none to communion with him till
he had baptized them in running water,
and for this he was called among the folk
Jochanan the Baptizer. Yet he was not
an Essene, for he joined not their communion,
nor established any distinction of
orders among the men who came out to
him; he was more like unto the prophets
of old, who taught as individuals new
truths about life; and his great teaching
was this: <q>Repent ye, for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand.</q> And men went out
to him, asking him in what they should
repent so as to become worthy of the
<pb n='30'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>kingdom. Above all, those who were despised
of the people because they did the
work of the Romans, by being their tax-gatherers
or their soldiers, feared the
wrath to come in the new kingdom which
he preached, and asked him in what they
should alter their ways. But to them he
was by no means hard, saying only to the
tax-gatherers, <q>Act justly,</q> and to the
soldiers, <q>Do no violence.</q> To the poor
he was tender and merciful, but exhorted
the rich to divide their possessions with
the poor. In this way he drew unto him
all who were despised of the people, and
those who were poor and miserable. Thus
he attracted the notice of the rulers, who
feared that he was preparing to rebel
against them; for they said, <q>Wherefore
does this man attract to him the discontented
and the soldiery?</q>
</p>

<p>
Now, when the family of Jesus heard
that their relative was gaining a name
among men, they sent to Jesus, asking
him to go with them unto his cousin; but
he, as I have heard, at first refused, saying,
<q>Wherein have I sinned, that I should be
baptized of Jochanan?</q> Yet afterwards
<pb n='31'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>he consented unto this, and went out to
be baptized of his cousin. And when he
saw the power for good that Jochanan
exercised, his spirit was exalted, and he
felt that he too had within him the same
power. Many strange things have I heard
of what happened to this Jesus when he
submitted to be baptized by his cousin.
And as none but Jesus would have known
his feelings on that occasion, these reports
must have come from him. Among us it
is the custom that each Jew should select
from the Psalms some <foreign rend='italic'>stichos</foreign> which should
serve as the motto of his life, and identify
him when he appeareth before the Angel
of Death. Now, it would appear that as
Jesus was being baptized of Jochanan he
heard the Daughter<note place="foot">The rabbis use this expression, <foreign rend='italic'>Bath Kol</foreign>, for any
supernatural revelation.—<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> of the Voice of God
say to him the <foreign rend='italic'>stichos</foreign> of the psalm, <q>Thou
art my Son; this day have I begotten
thee.</q> Whether this was a protest of his
soul against the slur cast upon his birth,
what man shall say? But henceforth he
spake of the fatherhood of God as if it
had to him a deeper sense than to most
<pb n='32'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>of us Jews, though with us, as I have oft
explained to thee, it is the central feeling
of our faith.
</p>

<p>
Jesus did not remain long out in the
wilderness with his cousin; he, indeed,
early recognized his superiority, though
he was his master and his teacher. For
at the first the teaching of Jesus differed
but in little from the teaching of Jochanan.
He summed up his whole aim in the
words which I had heard his followers use
in the Temple: <q>Repent ye, for the kingdom
of heaven is at hand;</q> and this he
must have learnt from his cousin. So,
too, like Jochanan, he mingled with the
tax-gatherers and the soldiery, and above
all addressed himself to the poor, and, as
I was to see, exhorted the rich to distribute
their possessions. In all these things
he was but the follower of his cousin Jochanan.
It is no wonder, therefore, that
when Jesus separated himself from Jochanan,
and began to be a teacher of men,
many left Jochanan and followed after
Jesus; and until this Jochanan met with
a violent end at the hands of the rulers,
there was in some sort a rivalry if not
be<pb n='33'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>tween the men themselves, at least between
the followers of Jochanan and of Jesus.
</p>

<p>
But even from the first there was a difference
in Jesus’ manner of teaching, if
not in the teaching itself. He, indeed, did
not wait for men to come out to him in the
wilderness, but returned to the towns and
villages around the Sea of Galilee. Many
of the fishermen left their work to follow
him, and become, as he said, <q>fishers of
men.</q> He preached as before in the synagogues
on the words of the prophets, but
now he commenced to go forth to preach
and teach among the people in their
homes. Yet it was observed that he went
not only among the rich and powerful, who
are used in our country to receive all who
come at meal-times, but most of all among
the poor, and those despised of men for
their ill life or their degraded occupations.
Nor did he despise those who know not the
Law nor keep its commands, but mixed
freely with them, thereby incurring the
wrath of those among us, and there are
many, who are eager for the credit of the
Law. Still, though he lived his life among
the low and the vile, he practiced none of
<pb n='34'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>their ways, nor was aught of low or vile
seen in him or those with him. Yet he
turned against him many who would have
been well disposed towards him, in that he
followed his cousin’s example, and spake
kindly to the tax-gatherers and to the soldiers,
whom the greater part of the Jews
regard as the enemies of their country.
</p>

<p>
Now, as he began to live his life among
the people, he began to do many signs
and wonders, like all our great teachers
and prophets. In truth, we say, how shall
a man be accounted a prophet unless he
can do wonders? Indeed, as Jesus himself
said, <q>Why marvel ye at the signs?
I give unto you an inheritance such as the
whole world holds not.</q> And the manner
of his wonders was this: if a man was
afflicted with a demon of madness, he
would cause him to fix his eyes upon his,
and after a while would speak sternly and
suddenly to the demon within him, who
would depart from him, rending his soul.
So, too, would he do with women who
were torn asunder by the demons fighting
within. To these he would speak
calmly after he had fixed their eyes, and,
<pb n='35'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>behold, a great calm would come upon
them. But he used no exorcisms or magic
in his healing, nor spake he in the name
of God, but with the tone of one having
authority in himself. Hence many thought
he had within him a greater Daimon than
those afflicted men and women whom he
healed. Thence it was thought that for
this reason the demons of madness often
returned to those whom he had freed for
a while with greater violence after he had
gone forth from the place of their habitation.
There was much murmuring against
him for that he did his healing, not in the
name of God, but in his own name and his
own authority.
</p>

<p>
Yet he claimed no authority to decide
the questions of the Law; though many
applied to him in difficult cases, these he
referred to the learned in the Law, saying,
<q>Do ye as the scribes command.</q> Yet
it was complained that he paid no great
attention to their commands himself, nor
for his followers. Nor did he rebuke men
when he saw them transgressing the Law
even in the greater transgressions. Thus
I have heard it said of him, that once with
<pb n='36'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>his followers, he met a man laboring on the
Sabbath day, a sin which, according to the
Law, was punished with stoning. But all
he said unto him was this: <q>Man, if thou
knowest what thou doest, blessed art thou;
but if thou knowest not, accursed art thou,
and a transgressor of the Law.</q><note place="foot">This Logion is only found elsewhere in one MS. of
the Gospels, viz., in the Codex Bezæ at Cambridge.—<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> This is,
indeed, a dark saying. Is each man, then,
to choose for himself which commands of
the Law he shall do, and which not? The
fence of the Law, which our Sages have
built up with such labor and toil, would be
stricken down at one stroke. Yet perhaps
in this he only followed the principle of our
Sages who have said, <q>The Sabbath was
made for you, not you for the Sabbath.</q>
</p>

<p>
Such was the manner of life of this Jesus
up to the time when I first saw him in the
Temple. Men knew not what to make of
him; many regarded him as a prophet because
of the signs and the wonders which
he did; and those who were looking forward
to the blessed day in which Israel would be
free again under its own king hoped that
he was Elijah come again to prepare the
way for the new kingdom.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
<index index="toc" level1="III. Earlier Teaching. Sermon in the Synagogue of the Galilæans"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="III. Earlier Teaching. Sermon in the Synagogue of the Galilaeans"/>
<head>III.<lb/>EARLIER TEACHING.<lb/>SERMON IN THE SYNAGOGUE OF THE
GALILÆANS.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg038'/>

<pb n='39'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>

<p>
It must have been a year after I had first
seen Jesus that I saw him again the second
time in Jerusalem. It fell out in this wise:
I was proceeding one morning to the meeting
of the Sanhedrim, when, as I came near
the Synagogue of the Galilæans in the Fish-Market,
I found a crowd of men entering in.
I asked one of them what was going forward,
and he said, <q>Jesus the Nazarene
will expound the Law.</q> So I determined
to take the morning service in this synagogue
rather than with my colleagues in
the Temple, and went in, the people giving
way before me, as was my due as a member
of the Sanhedrim.
</p>

<p>
Now, this synagogue of the Galilæans
differed in naught from the rest of the
synagogues of the Jews. It cannot be that
thou hast not visited one of these when
thou wast in the Holy City, but perchance
thy memory is dim after all these years,
and I will in a few words explain to thee
<pb n='40'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>its arrangement. In the wall at the west
end was the cabinet containing the scrolls
of the Law, with a curtain before it, for
this is, as it were, the Holy of Holies of the
synagogue. The men go up to this, on to
the platform before it, by three steps. Then
comes a vacant space, in the midst of which
stands a dais, with a reading-desk whereon
the Law is read: this we call by your
Greek name <foreign rend='italic'>bema</foreign>. Then in the rest of
the hall sit the folk, arranged in benches
one after another, somewhat as in your
theatres. Now, as I came in, they had said
the morning psalms, and most of the Eighteen
Blessings, and shortly after the reading
of the Law began. The curtain was
drawn aside from the holy ark, the scroll of
the Law was taken thence, to the singing
of psalms unto the <foreign rend='italic'>bema</foreign>. Then, as is
customary, the messenger of the congregation
summoned first to the reading of the
Law a Cohen, a descendant of Aaron, one
of the priestly caste. And after he had
read some verses of the Law in the holy
tongue, the dragoman read its translation
into Chaldee, so as to be understanded of
the unlearned folk, and of the women who
<pb n='41'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>were in the gallery outside the synagogue,
and separated from it by a grating. Then
after the priest came a Levite, who also
read some verses, and after him an ordinary
Israelite. Then the messenger of the synagogue
called out, <q>Let Rabbi Joshua ben
Joseph arise.</q> Then Jesus the Nazarene
went up to the <foreign rend='italic'>bema</foreign> and read his appointed
verses, and these were translated as before
by the dragoman. And after the reading
of the Law was concluded, the <foreign rend='italic'>Parnass</foreign>, or
president of the congregation, requested
Jesus to read the <foreign rend='italic'>Haphtara</foreign>, the lesson
from the prophets; and this he did, using
the cantillation with which we chant
words of Holy Scripture. Yet never heard
I one whose voice so thrilled me, and
brought home to one the import of the
great words; and this was strange, for his
accent was, as I had before noticed, that
of the Galilæan peasantry, at which we of
Jerusalem were wont to scoff. Then, after
the Law had been returned to the ark
with song and psalm, Jesus turned round
to the people on the <foreign rend='italic'>bema</foreign> and began his
discourse. It is near five-and-twenty years
since I heard him, and much have I
for<pb n='42'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>gotten in that long time. But many of his
sayings still ring in my ears, and I will
here put down, as far as possible in order,
all that I can remember of the discourse.<note place="foot">It must have been from a report of this discourse,
and that given on <ref target="Pg092">p. 92</ref>, that the majority of those utterances
of Jesus have been derived which are known in
modern theology as <q>Agrapha.</q>—<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note>
</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 2">
<q rend="post: none">It hath been written by the Prophet
Esaias: Behold, his reward is with him,
and his work before him. Yea, behold a
man and his work before him. He that
worketh not, let him not eat. Yet he that
plougheth, let him plough in hope; he
that thresheth, thresh in hope of partaking.
Howbeit, he who longs to be rich is
like a man who drinketh seawater: the
more he drinketh the more thirsty he becomes,
and never leaves off drinking till
he perish. Blessed is he who also fasts
that he may feed the poor: for it is more
blessed to give than to receive. Yet let
thy alms sweat into thy hands until thou
know to whom thou givest. Where there
are pains, thither hastens the physician:
that which is weak shall be saved by that
<pb n='43'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>which is strong. For the sake of the weak
I was weak, for the sake of the hungry I
hungered, for the sake of the thirsty I
thirsted. But woe to those who have yet
hypocritically taken from others; who are
able to help themselves, and yet wish to
take from others: for each man shall give
account in the day of judgment.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">That which thou hatest thou shalt not
do to another. Good things must come;
he is blessed through whom they come.
Love covereth a multitude of sins; so
never be joyful save when you look upon
your brother’s countenance in love. Let
not the sun go down upon your wrath.
For the greatest of crimes is this: if a
man shall sadden his brother’s spirit.
Blessed, too, are they who mourn for the
perdition of unbelievers. Do not give
occasion to the Wicked One. Who is the
Wicked One? He that tempts. Yet
none shall reach the kingdom of heaven
unless he have been tempted: for our
Father which is in heaven would rather
the repentance of a sinner than his correction.
Yet he will cleanse the house of his
kingdom from all offence. Be, therefore,
<pb n='44'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>careful and prudent and wise, lest any of
you be caught in the snares of the devil,
for that ancient enemy goes about buffeting.</q>
</p>

<p rend="margin-bottom: 2">
<q>If thou hast seen thy brother, thou
hast seen thy Lord, God the Father, whose
fatherland is everywhere, in heaven and
upon earth. Far and near, the Lord
knoweth his own. So grieve not the holy
spirit which is in you, nor extinguish the
light which shines in you. Guard the
flesh pure, and the signet spotless, so that
ye may take hold upon eternal life. For
our possessions are in heaven; therefore,
sons of men, purchase unto yourselves by
these transitory things which are not
yours, what is yours, and shall not pass
away.</q>
</p>

<p>
I cannot tell thee, Aglaophonos, how
deeply this discourse affected me. Just as
the Hellenes are eager to find each day
some new beauty in man or the world, or
some new truth about the relation of
things, so we Hebrews rejoice in finding
new ideals in the relations of men. Each
of our Sages prides himself on
this—<pb n='45'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>that he has said some maxim of wisdom
that none had thought of before him, and
so each of them is remembered in the
minds of men by one or more of his favorite
maxims. But it is rare if in a whole
lifetime a sage sayeth more than one word
fit to be treasured up among men. Yet
was this man Jesus dropping pearls of
wisdom from his mouth in prodigal profusion.
As each memorable word fell
from his lips, a murmur of delighted surprise
passed round the synagogue, and
each man looked to his neighbor with
brightened eyes. Some of the thoughts,
indeed, I had heard from other of our
Sages, but never in so pointed a form,
surely never in such profusion from a
single sage.
</p>

<p>
And if what was said delighted us, the
manner in which it was said entranced
us still more. The voice of the speaker
answered to the thoughts he expressed, as
the Kinnor of David, according to our
Sages, turned the wind into music. When
he spoke of love, his voice was as the
cooing dove; when he denounced the oppressor,
it clanged like a silver trumpet.
<pb n='46'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>Indeed, his whole countenance and bearing
changed in like manner, so that every
word he uttered seemed to be the outcome
of his whole being.
</p>

<p>
But most of all was it the vividness of
his eyes that impressed his words upon
us. I had seen them flashing with scorn
in the Temple, I now saw them melting
with tenderness in the synagogue; and
there was this of strange in them, that
they seemed to speak other and deeper
words. As he gazed upon us, I felt as if
all my inmost being was bare to the gaze
of those eyes. They seemed to know all
my secret thoughts and sins; and yet I
felt not ashamed, for as they saw the sins,
so they seemed to speak forgiveness of
them.
</p>

<p>
What I felt then, others felt with me,
for, as I afterwards learnt, each man felt
the same as the eyes of Jesus fell upon
him; and most curious it was that each
man thought as I did, that the eyes of the
speaker were upon him during the whole
of the discourse. I have seen here in Alexandria
portraits of men painted by your
subtlest artists, in which, from whatever
<pb n='47'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>place you looked at them, the eyes seemed
to gaze upon you. So was it with Jesus.
Not alone did I, who was, as a member of
the Sanhedrim, sitting immediately before
him, feel his eyes pierce to my soul, but all
who were in that synagogue felt the same.
Nor did the effect die away after I had
left the synagogue; for days and days
afterwards, whenever I closed my eyes, or
gazed for long on the wall, I could see the
eyes of Jesus, and with it his whole face
gazing upon me.
</p>

<p>
I had left the synagogue a little before
the others, because a messenger had been
sent from the Sanhedrim to seek for a
member who should make up the quorum
of Twenty-Three; and this messenger,
hearing that a member of the Sanhedrim
was in the synagogue of the Galilæans,
sent in to summon me. When the sitting
was over, I sought for Jesus again, but
found that he had left the city. And for
a time I neither saw nor heard aught
more of him, save such rumors as came
to the Holy City from Galilee. About
this time many joined themselves unto
him, going whithersoever he went. Those,
<pb n='48'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>too, who had joined themselves to Jochanan
passed over to him, for Jochanan had been
slain by Herod, whom he had rebuked for
his wicked living. It was, indeed, said
that Herod had also captured this Jesus
when he found that he was following in
the footsteps of Jochanan; but this proved
to be untrue, and the multitude thronged
more and more after Jesus, and from this
time he began to teach them regularly,
after the manner of our Sages. Yet he
did not pronounce decisions of Halacha
on questions of our Law; indeed, he disclaimed
all interference with such questions.
<q>I am not come,</q> he said, <q>to take
away from the Law of Moses, nor to add
to the Law of Moses am I come.</q> Only
one saying of his have I heard of wherein
he said aught at variance with the Torah.
When the children of a man who had recently
died asked him in what way should
the property be divided, he said, <q>Let son
and daughter inherit alike.</q> In this, as in
other things, he was more favorable to
the claims of the women than the Law
and the Sages. For this reason, perhaps,
it was that many women followed after
<pb n='49'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>him, even joined in prayer with him and
those with him, against the custom of our
nation. Hence arose much scandal among
the more rigidly pious among us, who follow
the saying of Joseph ben Jochanan,
<q>Engage not in much converse with
women.</q> But I have heard naught of
evil that resulted from this free mingling
of men and women among his followers.
Yet Jesus was not against the due subordination
of women, for he also said, <q>Let
the wife be in subordination to her husband.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thou must know that among us our
Sages are of two kinds, the Halachists and
the Hagadists. The former deal with matters
of the Law according to the tradition
they have received from their teacher; but
the latter expound the words of the
Scripture, and deal with the moral relations
of man to man. Some of our Sages,
indeed, like the great Hillel, who died
when I was a child, have been equally
masters both of the Halacha and the
Hagada; and in many ways the teaching
of Jesus seems to have resembled, if it did
not follow, that of Hillel. I must tell thee
<pb n='50'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>one anecdote about this Hillel which is
well known amongst us. He was distinguished
for his evenness of temper, and
men would often in sport try to make him
lose it. A heathen came before him one
day, and declared that he would become
a Jew if only Hillel would tell him the
whole Law while he stood upon one foot,
hoping thereby to irritate Hillel by his presumption.
But Hillel said only, <q>What
thou wilt not for thyself, do not to thy
neighbor. This is the whole of the Law;
all the rest is but commentary thereon.
Go and learn.</q> Now, among the disciples
of Hillel was one who compiled for
the heathen a summary of the Law in the
spirit of Hillel; and it seemed to me, from
what I heard of Jesus’ teaching, that he
had learnt much from this summary, which
is called <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>The Two Ways</hi>.</q> I will have
a copy written out for thee, for it is very
short.
</p>

<p>
Now, in all the teaching of Jesus which
I heard of about this time, he seems to
have expanded, but in no wise modified,
the teaching of <q>The Two Ways.</q> Above
all, he seems to have warned men against
<pb n='51'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>the evil feelings within, that lead to sins
against the Law, and therein differed
somewhat from the practice of our Sages,
who think that by doing the Law and
keeping to it rightful feelings shall grow,
and evil thoughts fly away.
</p>

<p>
Yet while in many ways Jesus seemed
to be of the School of Hillel, in others he
cast in his lot with the men among us who
claim to be especially favored of God, because—thou
wilt smile, Aglaophonos—because
they are poor. Thou hast read
our Psalms, and knowest with what insistence
the poor and the righteous, the rich
and the wicked, are identified in them.
Many of our nation have taken this to
heart, and as it were pride themselves
upon their humility, as some of them call
themselves <foreign rend='italic'>Ebionim</foreign>, or the Poor; some,
the <foreign rend='italic'>Zaddikim</foreign>, or Righteous; some, <foreign rend='italic'>Chasidim</foreign>,
or Pious. Thou canst not call them
a sect, for in a way they include the whole
nation. In the Eighteen Blessings which
form the staple of our daily prayers, the
Lord is blessed as the Guardian and Refuge
of the <foreign rend='italic'>Zaddikim</foreign>. Now, it was chiefly
among these men, whether they called
<pb n='52'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>themselves <foreign rend='italic'>Ebionim</foreign>, or <foreign rend='italic'>Zaddikim</foreign>, or
<foreign rend='italic'>Chasidim</foreign>, that Jesus found his chief adherents,
though he seems to give his preference
to the <foreign rend='italic'>Ebionim</foreign>, who have always
been insisting upon the blessedness of the
poor. Now, these men consider themselves
to be beyond all others the servants of the
Lord, and identify themselves with that
picture of the servant which has been
given by the Prophet Esaias. Thus in
all these ways Jesus appealed to the more
earnest part of our nation, and in him
were conjoined most of the movements
that had touched us most deeply. If any
had said at this time, <q>Jesus the Nazarene
is a follower of Jochanan the Baptizer, and
preaches <q>The Two Ways</q> to the Poor,</q>
none could have gainsaid him.
</p>

<p>
Yet all were wondering what he would
say to the other side of our nation’s hopes.
The life of our nation had begun with a
deliverance; our chief national feast recalls
that deliverance from Egypt to us every
year as the spring comes round. We have
become subject to all the great kingdoms
that have grown up round us, yet again and
again we have been delivered from each.
<pb n='53'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>Thou and I have often wondered how it
has come about that both Hellenes and
Hebrews, who feel ourselves in different
ways higher than these stolid Romans
who rule us, have yet become subject to
them. Thy nation hath acquiesced in
their rule; my people never will. Every
man who promises greatness among us is
hoped for as the Deliverer. Many men
about this time began to ask, Will Jesus
the Nazarene be the Deliverer?
</p>

<pb n='54'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
<index index="toc" level1="IV. The Two Ways"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="IV. The Two Ways"/>
<head>IV.<lb/>THE TWO WAYS.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg056'/>

<pb n='57'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>

<p>
Now, this is the <q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Catechism of the
Two Ways</hi></q> which I have had copied out
for thee, for in it is the essence of the
teaching of Jesus, as he himself recognized
in speaking to me, as thou wilt
shortly hear.
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">There are two ways, one of life and
one of death, but there is a great difference
between the two ways. Now, the
way of life is this: first, Thou shalt love
God who made thee; secondly, thy neighbor
as thyself, and all things whatsoever
thou wouldest not should be done to thee,
do thou also not do to another. Thou
shalt not kill, thou shalt not commit adultery,
thou shalt not corrupt boys, thou
shalt not commit fornication, thou shalt
not steal, thou shalt not use witchcraft,
thou shalt not use enchantments, thou
shalt not kill an infant whether before or
after birth, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s
goods.</q>
</p>

<pb n='58'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt not forswear thyself, thou
shalt not bear false witness, thou shalt not
revile, thou shalt not bear malice.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt not be double-minded nor
double-tongued; for duplicity of tongue is
a snare of death.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thy speech shall not be false nor vain.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt not be covetous, nor an
extortioner, nor a hypocrite, nor malignant,
nor haughty. Thou shalt not take
evil counsel against thy neighbor.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt hate no man, but some
thou shalt rebuke, and for some thou shalt
pray, and some thou shalt love above thine
own soul.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">My child, flee from all evil, and from
all that is like unto it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Be not soon angry, for anger leadeth
to murder; nor given to party-spirit, nor
contentious, nor quick-tempered, for from
all these are generated murders.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">My child, be not lustful, for lust leadeth
to fornication; neither be a filthy
talker, nor a lifter-up of the eyes, for from
all these things are generated adulteries.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">My child, be not thou an observer of
birds, for it leadeth to idolatry; nor a
<pb n='59'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>charmer, nor an astrologer, nor a user of
purifications; nor be thou willing to look
on those things, for from all these is generated
idolatry.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">My child, be not a liar, for lying leadeth
to theft; nor a lover of money, nor
fond of vainglory, for from all these things
are generated thefts.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">My child, be not a murmurer, for it
leadeth to blasphemy; neither self-willed,
nor evil-minded, for from all these things
are generated blasphemies.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Be thou long-suffering, and merciful,
and harmless, and quiet, and good, and
trembling continually at the words which
thou hast heard.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt not exalt thyself, nor shalt
thou give presumption to thy soul. Thy
soul shall not be joined to the lofty, but
with the just and lowly shalt thou converse.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">The events that happen to thee shalt
thou accept as good, knowing that without
God nothing taketh place.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">My child, thou shalt remember night
and day him that speaketh to thee the
word of God.</q>
</p>

<pb n='60'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">But thou shalt seek out day by day
the faces of the saints, that thou mayest
rest in their words.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt not desire division, but
shalt make peace between those at strife;
so thou shalt judge justly. Thou shalt
not respect a person in rebuking for transgressions.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt not be of two minds
whether it shall be or not.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Be not one that stretcheth out his
hands to receive, but shutteth them close
for giving.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">If thou hast, thou shalt give with thine
hands a ransom for thy sins.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt not hesitate to give, nor
when thou givest shalt thou murmur, for
thou shalt know who is the good recompenser
of the reward.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt not turn away from him
that needeth, but shalt share all things
with thy brother, and shalt not say that
they are thine own; for if ye are fellow-sharers
in that which is imperishable, how
much more in perishable things.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt not take away thine hand
from thy son or from thy daughter, but
<pb n='61'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>from their youth up shalt thou teach them
the fear of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt not in thy bitterness lay
commands on thy man-servant or thy
maid-servant, who hope in the same God,
lest they should not fear him who is God
over you both; for He cometh not to call
men according to the outward appearance,
but to those whom the Spirit hath prepared.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">But ye, servants, shall be subject to
your masters as to a figure of God in
reverence and fear.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt hate all hypocrisy, and
everything which is not pleasing to the
Lord.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt not forsake the commandments
of the Lord, but shalt keep what
thou hast received, neither adding thereto
nor taking away from it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Thou shalt confess thy transgressions,
and shalt not come to thy prayer with an
evil conscience. This is the way of life.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">But the way of death is this. First of
all, it is evil and full of curse; murders,
adulteries, lusts, fornications, thefts, idolatries,
witchcrafts, sorceries, robberies,
false-<pb n='62'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>witnessings, hypocrisies, double-heartedness,
deceit, pride, wickedness, self-will,
covetousness, filthy talking, jealousy, presumption,
haughtiness, flattery.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Persecutors of the good, hating truth,
loving a lie, not knowing the reward of
righteousness, not cleaving to that which
is good nor to righteous judgment, watching
not for the good but for the evil, far
from whom is meekness and patience, loving
vain things, seeking after reward, not
pitying the poor, not toiling with him who
is vexed with toil, not knowing Him that
made them, murderers of children, destroyers
of the image of God, turning away
from him that is in need, vexing him that
is afflicted, advocates of the rich, lawless
judges of the poor, wholly sinful.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Take heed that no one make thee to
err from this way of teaching, since he
teacheth thee not according to God.</q>
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
<index index="toc" level1="V. The Woman taken in Adultery. The Rich Young Man"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="V. The Woman taken in Adultery. The Rich Young Man"/>
<head>V.<lb/>THE WOMAN TAKEN IN ADULTERY.<lb/>THE RICH YOUNG MAN.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg064'/>

<pb n='65'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>

<p>
It must have been many months after I
had heard him discourse in the Galilæan
synagogue that I again saw Jesus the
Nazarene. We in Jerusalem had our own
concerns to think of.
</p>

<p>
At this time the long monopoly of rule
by the Sadducees was gradually being
broken. Of the three divisions of the
Sanhedrim, that of the ordinary Israelites
had become almost entirely composed of
the Pharisees; I myself had been elected
as one of that party, and even in the other
two sections of the Priests and of the
Levites, many, especially among the latter,
held with the Pharisees. Nor was this
without influence upon the political issues
of the times. The Sadducees, being the
sacerdotal party, had no cause why they
should be dissatisfied with the position
they held in the State under the Romans;
but we of the Pharisees felt far otherwise
about the national hopes for deliverance.
<pb n='66'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>Since my days the influence of the Pharisees
has become predominant in the
nation, and I foresee that the struggle
between us and the Romans cannot be
delayed for long. At the time of which
I am writing, the hegemony had not yet
passed over to the Pharisees, and it was
of import for us all to know whether any
man of influence was on our side, or on
that of the Sadducees, or whether he cared
for neither, and cast in his lot with the
smaller sects.
</p>

<p>
Now, it happened about this time that I
was attending my place in the Sanhedrim
of Israelites, to judge of a case of adultery.
But in this matter our Sages, and especially
those of the Pharisaic tradition, had
made great changes in the Law as laid
down for us by Moses; for he, as thou
knowest, commands that a woman taken
in adultery shall be stoned to death. Now,
for a long time among us there has been
an increasing horror of inflicting the
death penalty. If a Sanhedrim inflicts
capital punishment more than once in
seven years, it is called a Sanhedrim of
murderers. Yet the Law of Moses
de<pb n='67'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>clared that whosoever was guilty of adultery
would be put to death. What, then,
was to be done? It is against the principle
of justice that any should be punished
for an offence of which he is ignorant.
Hence, in capital offences, our Sages, to
mercy inclined, have laid it down that a
man must be assumed to be ignorant of
the guilt of the offence, unless it be proved
that he had been solemnly warned of its
gravity; and in our Law proof can only
be given by two simultaneous witnesses.
Hence it is impossible to obtain conviction
for a woman who hath committed
adultery, unless proof is given that she
hath been previously warned by two persons
at once. This can scarcely ever be.
No Jewish woman in my time has ever
been stoned as the Law commands for
this sin. Some think that this is too
great a leniency, and of evil result for the
morality of the folk.
</p>

<p>
When I arrived at the hall of polished
stones near the Temple, in which the Sanhedrim
holds its sittings, the trial had
nearly come to a conclusion. The inquiry
had been made if any two credible
wit<pb n='68'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>nesses had given the woman the preliminary
caution, and none answering to the
call, it remained only for the <foreign rend='italic'>Ab Beth Din</foreign>,
the president of the court, to dismiss the
prisoner with the words of caution and
advice which are customary on such
occasions: <q>My daughter, perhaps thou
wert led into sin by too much wine, or by
thoughtlessness, or perhaps by thy youth;
perchance it was mixing in crowds, or
wicked companions that led thee to sin:
go, and for the sake of the great Name,
do not bring it to pass that thou must be
destroyed by the water of jealousy.</q> And
with these words the court was dismissed,
and several of us were appointed to take
the woman to her home, and induce the
man, her husband, to take her to him once
again. Now, as we were passing through
the courts of the Temple, we saw Jesus
the Nazarene in one of the smaller courts,
seated, teaching the people, some of whom
sat at his feet. But it seemed to some of
us a favorable opportunity to test what he
would say as regards the Law of Moses
relating to adultery: for if he would declare
that the Law must be carried out in all its
<pb n='69'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>rigor, that would show that our Sages were
more merciful than he; if, on the other
hand, he adopted the opinion of our Sages,
that would in so far commit him to support
their attitude towards the Law in general.
In any case, it seemed a suitable occasion
to test his power of dealing with the Law,
and it is customary among us to put such
test cases before the younger Sages.
</p>

<p>
We therefore turned aside and entered
into the smaller court, and all rose to do
honor to the Sanhedrim. Then one of us
said to him, <q>Rabbi, this woman was taken
in adultery, in the very act. Now, Moses
in the Law hath commanded that such
should be stoned: what sayest thou?</q>
Now, when the man told him that the
woman had been taken in the very act of
adultery, a deep blush passed over his face,
and he turned his eyes downwards. Then
he bent down to the ground, hiding his
face altogether from us, and writing, as it
were, something on the sand of the floor.
Now, at first, I thought of the cry of the
money-changers that I had heard, and felt
ashamed in my soul that such a question
should be brought before this man, of all
<pb n='70'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>men: for our Sages have said, <q>The greatest
of sins is this—to bring a blush upon
thy neighbor’s face in public.</q> But the
others thought not of this, but once more
they asked him, <q>Rabbi, what sayest thou
shall be done in this case?</q> Then, without
raising his head, Jesus said in a low
tone, <q>Let him among you that is without
sin cast the first stone.</q> Then we saw that
his shame had been for us, and for our
want of feeling in putting such a question
in the very presence of her who had sinned.
And in this matter we hold that sin can
be in thought as well as in act, and which
of us could say that we were without sin
even in thought? So, in very shame, we
turned and went, and left Jesus alone with
the woman.
</p>

<p>
Yet, after we had come away from him,
Matathias ben Meshullam said, <q>That is
well,—we are rightly rebuked; but yet,
dost thou not see that this man hath not
answered our question, nor do we know, as
we wished, what attitude he takes towards
the carrying out of the Law? I hear that
each morning he preaches to the people in
the Temple. Let us now tomorrow
<pb n='71'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>put such questions to him that he cannot
evade, and find out to which of our
parties he belongs; for this is a man that
is getting great weight with the people,
and it imports us to know where he stands
with regard to us.</q> So it was determined
among us that the next morning a Sadducee
and a Pharisee should put to him
queries which should determine what views
he held on the great questions which distinguished
the two great parties of the
State.
</p>

<p>
But that very afternoon I was to learn
that this Jesus had to deal with questions
with which none of our parties concerned
themselves. For, as I was coming near to
Gethsemane, I met Jesus with a band of
men and women going out towards Bethany,
and I passed them with the salutation
of <q>Peace.</q> But as I passed, a young
man whom I knew, that had recently come
into great possessions upon the death of
his father, came up and asked, <q>Who is
that man whom thou hast just greeted?</q>
and I said, <q>Jesus the Nazarene.</q> Then,
suddenly, he set off running to catch them
up, and being curious, I turned and
fol<pb n='72'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>lowed him. When I reached them I found
the young man kneeling before Jesus, gazing
up to him, and he said, <q>Good Master,
I have inherited great possessions; what
shall I do that I may inherit the life everlasting?</q>
Jesus said to him, <q>Call not me
<q>Good;</q> none is good but the One. If
thou wouldest enter into life, do the commandments.</q>
The young man asked,
<q>Which?</q> Jesus said, using the doctrine
of <q>The Two Ways,</q> <q>Do not kill, do not
commit adultery, do not steal, do not bear
false witness, do not defraud, honor thy
father and thy mother, and love thy neighbor
as thyself.</q> Then the young man
said, <q>All these things have I kept from
my youth up: what lack I yet?</q> Then
Jesus said, <q>One thing thou lackest: go
thy way, sell all thou hast, and give unto
the poor, and thou shalt have heavenly
treasures: come then and follow me.</q>
The young man began to scratch his head,
and seemed in doubt. Then Jesus said
unto him, <q>How is it thou canst say, <q>I
have done the Law and the Prophets,</q>
since it is written in the Law, <q>Thou shalt
love thy neighbor as thyself</q>? Behold,
<pb n='73'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>many of thy brothers, sons of Abraham,
are clothed but in dung, and die for hunger,
while thy house is full of many goods,
and there goeth not forth aught from it
unto them.</q> But the young man rose, and
went away in sorrow and confusion. Then
Jesus looked round upon those who were
there, and said, <q>How hard it is for them
that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom
of God! It is easier for an elephant
to go through a needle’s eye, as the saying
is, than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of God.</q> Then a murmur arose
among all those present, and they began
to move on, and I left them. And I said
to myself, <q>This man is neither Pharisee,
nor Sadducee, nor Herodian; these be the
thoughts of the Ebionim.</q>
</p>

<pb n='74'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
<index index="toc" level1="VI. The Testings in the Temple"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="VI. The Testings in the Temple"/>
<head>VI.<lb/>THE TESTINGS IN THE TEMPLE.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg076'/>

<pb n='77'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>

<p>
Now, on the morrow, many of us who
had agreed together to test the opinions of
this Jesus went to the Temple and found
Jesus walking in the corridors. Then he
that was of most authority among us said
unto Jesus, <q>Rabbi, we would ask certain
questions of thee;</q> and Jesus answered,
<q>Ask, and it shall be answered unto thee.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thou must know that among us Jews
there be two chief schools of thought, or
rather thou mightest say, parties of the
State. The one holds with the High
Priest and the rulers, and is mainly made
up of those whom ye Hellenes call the
Best, and their retainers. These be known
as the Sadducees, for their leaders are
mainly of the family of the High Priest
Sadduk. Now, the other party is in some
sort the party of the Demos, in that they
seek to lessen the power of the High
Priests and their families. But with us,
as thou knowest, all things turn upon
reli<pb n='78'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>gion, and this second party differ chiefly
from the Sadducees, for that they are more
in earnest with the matters of the Law,
and chiefly they fear the influence of thy
nation, Aglaophonos, in drawing the Israelite
away from the Law. Therefore have
they increased precept upon precept, so as
to make, as they say, a fence round the
Law. And as they would separate themselves
from the heathen by this fence, they
call themselves Pharisees, that is, Separatists.
</p>

<p>
Now, it was nowise easy to learn whether
a man was of the one party or the other.
For he might be eager for the Law, and so
be Pharisaic in color, and yet approve of
the dominion of the priests, and thus be
a Sadducee. Yet in one chief matter of
thought they went asunder contrariwise,
and that was concerning the resurrection
of the dead. Now, with regard to that,
the Sadducees held that naught was said
in the Law of Moses, and therefore no son
of Israel need concern himself with it. But
the Pharisees, on the other hand, laid great
weight upon this. So here was a touchstone
by which to learn whether this Jesus
<pb n='79'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>followed the one or the other of the two
great divisions of our nation.
</p>

<p>
Then, as was agreed upon, Kamithos
the Sadducee came forward to ask him the
question which should determine whether
he held with them that there was no resurrection
from the dead, or with the rest of
the nation. He said, <q>Rabbi, it is written
in the Torah, if brethren dwell together,
and one of them die and have no son, the
wife of the dead one shall not marry without,
unto a stranger; her husband’s brother
shall take her to him to wife, and raise
up seed unto his brother. Suppose, now,
there are seven brethren, and the first
takes a wife, and dying leaves no son; and
the second takes her, as is our custom, and
dies without leaving any seed; and the
third likewise, and so on, till the whole
seven had married her, and yet had no
son; then the woman dies also: when
they shall rise from the dead together,
whose wife shall she be of them? for all
seven had her to wife.</q> And Jesus answered
and said, <q>Ye are at fault, and
know not the Scriptures, nor the power of
God; for in the resurrection they neither
<pb n='80'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>marry, nor are given in marriage, but are
even as the angels which are in heaven.
And as an indication from Scripture that
the dead rise, is it not written in the book
of Moses, when God spake to him from
the bush, saying, <q>I am the God of Abraham,
and the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob</q>? He is not the God of the
dead, but the God of the living: therefore
are ye in error.</q>
</p>

<p>
And we were surprised at the subtlety
of the man; and chiefly men marvelled at
the wisdom of this man in finding what
we call a support, that is, a text of Scripture
on which to hang the doctrine of the
life after death, which many believe to
have grown up among us since the sacred
Scriptures were written: for in them little,
if anything, was said of the world to come.
Now, Jesus in his answer had happened
upon a text which said that Abraham and
Isaac and Jacob were living when they
were dead to this world, and the people
marvelled greatly thereat.
</p>

<p>
Now, it had been agreed upon, that
after the Sadducees had asked their question
and been answered, I should stand
<pb n='81'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>forth and test this man Jesus on behalf of
the Pharisees. Now, one of our Sages
hath said, <q>Be as careful of a little precept
as of a great one;</q> whereas our great
master Hillel had, as I have told thee,
summed up the whole Law in one precept,
<q>Love thy neighbor as thyself.</q> Therefore,
we of the Pharisees wished to know
whether this Jesus agreed with the one
sage or the other; so I spake unto him
and said, <q>Rabbi, which is the first commandment,
by doing which I shall inherit
the life everlasting?</q> But at first he answered
me not directly, but said, <q>How
readest thou?</q> Then I remembered me
the words of the <q>Catechism of the Two
Ways,</q> and answered, <q>Thou shalt love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy strength, and with all thy
mind, and thy neighbor as thyself: whatsoever
thou wouldest not for thyself, do
not to another.</q> And he said unto me,
<q>Thou hast answered right; and the first
of the commandments is the <foreign rend='italic'>Shema</foreign>:
<q>Hear, O Israel; the Lord thy God is
one God.</q> And the second is like, namely
this: <q>Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
<pb n='82'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>thyself.</q> There is none other commandment
greater than these. This do, and
thou shalt live.</q> Then I was rejoiced,
and said unto him, <q>Well, Rabbi, thou
hast said the truth: there is one God, and
there is none other but him; and to love
him with all the heart, and with all the
understanding, and with all the soul, and
all the strength, and to love one’s neighbor
as one’s self, is more than all the burnt
offerings and sacrifices.</q> Then Jesus became
gracious unto me, and said, <q>Thou
art not far from the kingdom of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
But then I would learn further from this
man who spake so well, and ask him the
question which is current in our schools
on this subject, and I said to him, <q>But,
Rabbi, who is my neighbor?</q> and he
answered with a <foreign rend='italic'>mashal</foreign>, or parable, and
said, <q>To what is the matter like? A
certain man was going down from Jerusalem
to Jericho; and he fell among robbers,
which both stripped him and beat
him, and departed, leaving him half dead.
And by chance a certain priest was going
down that way: and when he saw him, he
passed by on the other side. And in like
<pb n='83'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>manner a Levite also, when he came to
the place, and saw him, passed by on the
other side. But a certain Israelite,<note place="foot">The gospel version reads <q>Samaritan.</q>—<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> as
he journeyed, came where he was: and
when he saw him, he was moved with
compassion, and came to him, and bound
up his wounds, pouring on them oil and
wine; and he set him on his own beast,
and brought him to an inn, and took care
of him. And on the morrow he took out
two pence, and gave them to the host, and
said, <q>Take care of him; and whatsoever
thou spendest more, I, when I come back
again, will repay thee.</q> Which of these
three, thinkest thou, proved neighbor unto
him that fell among the robbers?</q> Then
I said, <q>Not the priest, nor the Levite,
though they held office in Israel, but the
simple Israelite who showed mercy upon
him.</q> Then Jesus said unto me, <q>Go and
do thou likewise;</q> and at this moment we
were all summoned to the mid-day sacrifice
in the Temple.
</p>

<p>
When Jesus had departed, after the sacrifice,
we all met together and discussed
his answers, which had stamped him in
<pb n='84'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>our minds as a master in the art of question
and answer, which is with us as favorable
a trial of skill as oratory or poetry
with you Hellenes. Now, as regards the
question of the Sadducees, men thought
he had spoken more openly; for though
he had evaded a direct answer to the
question of the seven brothers and their
wife, he had yet implied that they all
would have a part in the life to come.
Some regretted that the question had not
been put differently, and the problem set—if
a son had been born through the
seventh brother: for this might have
thrown light upon the question of the
schools, whether the brother’s widow was
to be still regarded as his wife if seed had
been raised to him after his death. But
as to the support which Jesus had taken
from Scripture for the life everlasting,
though here again he had answered question
by question, it was decided that he
was against the Sadducees on this point.
</p>

<p>
But on the questions which I had put
to him, all had agreed that he had answered
as a Pharisee, even as Hillel might
have answered, for he had yea-said the
<pb n='85'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>doctrine which I had cited from the beginning
of <q>The Two Ways</q> in which the
doctrine of Hillel is summed up; and even
as to my further question, as to who is the
<foreign rend='italic'>chaber</foreign>, or neighbor, though opinions were
divided, most thought that he had spoken
as a Pharisee might have spoken: for
thou knowest, Aglaophonos, that our nation
is divided into three great classes—the
<foreign rend='italic'>Cohanim</foreign>, or Priests; the Levites;
and the common Israelites. Now, of these,
the two former are the officials of the
Temple, and most if not all of the Sadducees
are from this class. And, in declaring
himself on the side of the third
class of simple Israelites, Jesus had, we all
thought, declared himself on the side of
the Pharisees.
</p>

<pb n='86'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
<index index="toc" level1="VII. The Second Sermon"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="VII. The Second Sermon"/>
<head>VII.<lb/>THE SECOND SERMON.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg088'/>

<pb n='89'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>

<p>
I cannot clearly remember at what
season of the year it was that I next saw
Jesus; indeed, I am surprised to think
that, after the lapse of nearly five-and-twenty
years, I can still remember almost
all that passed on the various occasions
when I was in his presence. Yet I think
it was about the time of the feast which
we hold in memory of the rededication of
the Temple under the Maccabæans that
I again saw and heard the Galilæan stranger;
for I mind me that I had just been
taking the eight-branch candlestick which
we use in the ceremonials of this feast to
Petachayah the silversmith to be mended,
when on my return I saw a throng collected
round the synagogue of the Galilæans,
and entering in, found that Jesus was
to preach that day. The same ceremonial
was gone through as I have already described
to thee: the Law was taken from
the ark with rejoicing; priest and Levite
<pb n='90'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>and four ordinary Israelites were summoned
to hear it read, and again the
crier called, <q>Let Rabbi Joshua, the son
of Rabbi Joseph, arise.</q> Now, it chanced
that this time, I, as a member of the Sanhedrim,
was summoned to the reading of
the Law immediately after Jesus, and for a
time, as is customary, we stood together
upon the <foreign rend='italic'>bema</foreign>. I observed that, as the
reading of the Law proceeded, the eyes of
the Nazarene became fixed upon the ark,
and a veil of mysterious tenderness seemed
to come over them, as if he were in communion
with the <foreign rend='italic'>Shechinah</foreign>, or Glory, itself.
It seemed to me that afterwards,
when he read the <foreign rend='italic'>Haphtara</foreign> from the prophets,
and when he preached, something
remained in him of this mystical communion.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps it was for this that we seemed
to miss that sense of individual address
which we had before observed in his eyes.
No longer did these speak to us other and
deeper thoughts than the words of the
preacher; they seemed to dream of divine
things, and so caused us also to be rapt
in mystic musings. I cannot on this
ac<pb n='91'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>count recall for you all or even many of
the words which he uttered on this occasion.
He began with some plain teaching
about practice. Soon he went on to speak
of himself in a marvellous way, as if he
would imply that communion with him
and with the Most High were one and the
same, and then in his last words he seemed
to speak of the Last Things. And here
again his words seemed as if he identified
himself with the great Judge.
</p>

<p>
Now, this is not so strange to our mode
of thinking in Israel as thou mightest
think. Almost all our prophets speak the
oracles of God as if they were using the
very words of the Lord. Thou canst read
in the Greek translation of the Seventy
many passages of the prophets in which
the very words of the Lord are given.
Yet in most, if not all, cases the prophet
beginneth, <q>Thus saith the Lord,</q> or endeth,
<q>This is the word of the Lord.</q> But
with this Jesus it was otherwise. He
spoke as the ancient prophets do, but
whether from his rapt intentness in the
message he was delivering, or because he
felt his spirit for the time merged in the
<pb n='92'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>divine, he spoke as if the message was his.
And as he spoke, I saw looks of amazement
pass between many in the synagogue,
and one old graybeard rose as if to
protest, and then, shaking his withered
hands above his head, went out of the
synagogue.
</p>

<p>
I will here set down for thee as many of
the words that fell from Jesus’ lips on this
occasion as I can remember. They are
but few, but many of them are weighty,
and I have told thee above the general
lines of thought which seemed to run
through his discourse; and these are the
words as far as I remember them.<note place="foot">See note on <ref target="Pg042">p. 42</ref>.—<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note>
</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 2">
<q rend="post: none">Cultivate faith and hope, through
which is born that love of God and man
which gives the eternal life. Those are
the sons of God who walk in the spirit of
God. What you preach before the folk,
do in deed before every one. Accept not
anything from any man, and possess not
anything in this world. For the Father
wisheth to be given to each man from his
own gifts. Cleave unto the saints: for
<pb n='93'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>they that cleave unto them shall be sanctified.
Yet shall there be schisms and heresies:
for there is a shame which leadeth
to death, as there is a shame which leadeth
to life. Is it not enough for the disciples
to be as the Master? If in a little
you are not faithful, who shall give unto
you what is much? Seek the great, and
the little will be added to you; seek the
heavenly, and the things of earth will be
superadded.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">He that wonders shall reign, he who
reigns shall find rest. My secret is for
me, and for those that are mine are the
things which eye saw not, and ear heard
not, which entered not into the heart of
man, whatsoever things God prepared for
them that love him. Those who wish to
see me, and wish to cling to the kingdom,
must take me through affliction and suffering.
For he that is near me is near the
fire, he that is far from me is far from the
kingdom. Where one is, there too am I;
where twain are, there too will I be. As
any of you sees himself in the water or in
the mirror, so let him see me in himself.</q>
</p>

<p rend="margin-bottom: 2">
<q>They that love me shall receive the
<pb n='94'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>crown. I will choose me the good, those
good whom my Father in the heavens
hath given me. Let the lawless continue
in lawlessness, the just be justified. Behold,
I make the last as the first, and all
things new. In whatsoever state I find
you, in that also will I judge you.</q>
</p>

<p>
Never heard I any who spoke of himself
as this man did. For days and days afterwards
some of his words came to me again
and again. Whenever I was alone I
seemed to hear his voice saying, <q>Where
one is, there too am I; where twain are,
there too will I be.</q> Whenever I gazed
on the running stream or looked on the
polished steel of the mirror, again I seemed
to hear him say, <q>As any of you sees himself
in the water or in the mirror, so let
him see me in himself.</q> And, in truth, at
times my features seemed to fade away,
and the face of Jesus gaze upon me.
</p>

<p>
Others thought not as I. When we
assembled after the sermon, to talk over it,
as is our custom, I found that most had
been chiefly touched by certain sayings at
the end of the sermon, in which Jesus
<pb n='95'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>seemed to speak of the future life and the
last judgment. Thou knowest, Aglaophonos,
that with regard to these matters
I incline more to the teaching of the Sadducean
sect, who hold that Holy Scripture
speaketh not of these things, and
that, therefore, we need not and should
not think thereon. But there were few
who held that doctrine in the synagogue
that day, and these thought most of the
words in which Jesus seemed to claim the
prerogatives of the Divine Judge. <q>I was
amazed,</q> quoth Serachyah ben Pinchas,
<q>when he spoke of judging us himself in
the last days: it wanted but a little that I
had rent my garments at the blasphemy.
But surely, thought I to myself, the man
will shortly tell us, <q>These are the words
of the Lord,</q> and so I refrained.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now I will tell thee of a most strange
event that happened with me and this
Jesus. A day or two after this, I was
sitting in my room and studying the
words of Torah, and had fallen into deep
thought on the things of this life and the
next, and gradually I fell thinking of certain
words that I had heard from Jesus
<pb n='96'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>the Nazarene, as I have before told you.
Hast thou ever felt, Aglaophonos, as if
some one was gazing upon thee, and thou
couldst not refrain from looking round to
see who it was? So I felt at this moment,
and I looked up from the sacred scroll, and
lo! Jesus the Nazarene stood before me,
gazing upon me with those piercing eyes
I can never forget. His face was pale
and indistinct, but the eyes shone forth
as if with tenderness and pity. Then he
seemed to lean forward, and spoke to me
in a low yet piercing voice these words:
<q>Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from
the dead, and the Christ shall shine upon
thee.</q> I had shrunk back from his gaze,
and was, indeed, in all amaze and wonder
that he should be in the room; but when I
looked again, behold, he was gone, there
was no man there.
</p>

<p>
But this is not all the wonder of that
event, for, being startled, and, indeed,
somewhat fearful at his sudden appearance
and disappearance, I arose and went
out into the highway, and went out to
walk on the Gethsemane road. Now, as I
came clear of the city, I saw a group of
<pb n='97'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>men coming down the opposite hill, and
when they came near, behold, it was Jesus
and some of his friends. I was astonished
and surprised beyond all measure, for how
could Jesus have just been with me, and
be now coming from Gethsemane? And
when they were passing me, Jesus glanced
at me very slightly, as at a stranger—he
that had spoken to my soul but a few
minutes since.
</p>

<p>
Now, after they had passed me, there
came one running after them whom I knew—one
Meshullam ben Hanoch—and I
stopped him and asked him whither he
was going, and he said, <q>Stay me not.
I have run all the way from Bethany to
catch up that man thou seest there, Jesus
the Nazarene;</q> and with that he took up
his running and left me.
</p>

<p>
I knew not what to think. I had seen
and heard Jesus in my own house in Jerusalem,
and lo! at that very same time, as
I now learned, he had been at Bethany.
What thinkest thou, Aglaophonos,—can
a man be in two places at one and the
same time? or can it be that the mind of
man, and the power of his eye, can go
<pb n='98'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>forth from his body and create a vision of
another man that hath all the semblance
of reality? I know not what to think;
but I have heard that, even after his death,
those who were nearest and dearest to
Jesus saw him and heard him even as I
did. Nor do I wonder at this, after what
has occurred to myself.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
<index index="toc" level1="VIII. The Rebuking of Jesus"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="VIII. The Rebuking of Jesus"/>
<head>VIII.<lb/>THE REBUKING OF JESUS.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg100'/>

<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>

<p>
Now, it chanced that about this time
I was invited to a feast at the house of
Elisha ben Simeon, one of the leaders of
the Pharisees in Jerusalem. His son had
become thirteen years old that week, and,
as is our custom, was received into the
holy congregation as a Son of the Covenant
on the Sabbath. He had been summoned
up to the reading of the Law, and
had himself read aloud a portion of it; for
from this day onward he was to be treated
in all matters of religion as if he were a
man. Being a friend of his father, I had
attended his synagogue, and heard the
lad’s pure voice for the first time in his life
declare publicly his faith in the Most High.
</p>

<p>
After the service in the synagogue, his
friends accompanied the father and the lad
to their house, and with them went I, who
had known the father from our schoolboy
days, and the little lad from the time of his
birth.
</p>

<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>

<p>
Now, it chanced that, as we came near
the door of Elisha’s house, we met Jesus the
Nazarene, and two or three with him. So
Elisha greeted them, and invited them
courteously to join the feast, as is the custom
among us. And Jesus and the others
assented, and followed into the house with
us. <q>To table, to table!</q> cried Elisha,
pointing to the couches standing round
the well-filled board.
</p>

<p>
When we were all seated, the host and
his son came round with an ewer and basin
to perform the washing of the hands prescribed
by the Law. But when they came
to the Galilæan strangers, these refused,
saying, <q>We wash not before meals.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then we must serve ye last,</q> said
Elisha, with a smile. But the others took
not the matter so pleasantly; for since we
have one common dish, which is handed
round to the guests for them to take their
food with their fingers, it is considered
gross ill-breeding for a man not to perform
the ceremony of washing before meals.
</p>

<p>
Then Elisha took a seat at the centre
of the table, and said the grace before
meals. Then he broke bread, and,
dip<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>ping a morsel into salt for each of the
guests, he called his son to him to carry
it round. When he saw that each of the
guests had a piece of bread dipped in salt,
Elisha recited the blessing on the bread,
<q>Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, who
bringest forth bread from the earth,</q> and
all said <q>Amen.</q> And one of the guests
said to Elisha, <q>I am glad we are not in
Babylon.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How so, Phineas?</q> said Elisha to the
man, who was well known at all feasts at
that time in Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
And Phineas said, <q>For there they only
eat bread with their bread.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay, that would not suit thee, Phineas.
Thou art no Nazarite;</q> and most of the
guests who knew him laughed.
</p>

<p>
Then Elisha clapped his hands, and the
slaves took round the first course of salted
fish; then afterwards the cold baked meats—for,
being the Sabbath, the food had
been prepared the day before.
</p>

<p>
Then one of the guests said to one of
the Galilæans, <q>Is it true that you allow
fowl to be boiled in milk in your country?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, truly; why not?</q> said the Galilæan.
</p>

<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>

<p>
<q>Is it not written thrice in the Law,</q>
said the guest, <q><q>Thou shalt not seethe
the kid in its mother’s milk</q>?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In our country,</q> said the Galilæan,
<q>fowls give no milk.</q> And we all of us
laughed, save only Jesus.
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay, but the Sages have carried their
prohibition even unto fowls, lest the people
be led to confuse flesh and flesh.</q>
</p>

<p>
By this time we had arrived at the third
and last course of salted olives, lettuces,
and radishes. And again the bowl and
ewer were passed round, and this time the
Galilæans did not refuse the water. Then
the new son of the covenant recited in his
clear voice the grace after meals. And all
rose, while the slaves removed the remnants.
Then said Elisha, <q>It is not well
that when so many are together we should
depart without discussing some words of
the Law. My little Lazarus here would
fain learn some new thing from the many
learned men present on this day of his
being received into Israel.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, then,</q> said one of the company,
<q>I should like to put a question to our
friends here from Galilee.</q> And they
said, <q>Speak, Rabbi.</q>
</p>

<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>

<p>
And he addressed himself to Jesus, and
said, <q>Why walk not thy disciples according
to the tradition of the elders, but eat
bread with unwashen hands?</q>
</p>

<p>
Then Jesus spoke out, and as he spoke
he strode up and down the room, with his
hand clutching the air, and the vein throbbing
on his left temple. <q>Well hath
Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites, as it
is written, <q>This people honoreth me with
their lips, but their heart is far from me.
Howbeit in vain do they worship me,
teaching for doctrines the commandments
of men.</q></q> Then facing us all, he added,
<q>For ye lay aside the commandment of
God, and hold the tradition of men.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How so, master?</q> said Elisha; <q>prove
thy words.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is said in the Word of God, <q>Honor
thy father and thy mother,</q> and yet the
Sages say, <q>If a man be asked by his father
or mother to honor them with a gift,
and he say, <q>I vow that thing to the Almighty,</q>
then it is <foreign rend='italic'>Corban</foreign>,</q> and put aside
for the Lord, so that his parents cannot
enjoy thereof. Thus by your tradition
about vows ye make the Word of God
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>concerning honor to parents of none effect,
and many like things ye do.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then Elisha said, <q>But the Sages are
by no means at one in that matter of the
vows, and in particular many of them declare
all the vows annulled that would
work against our duty to our parents, or
even against our love to our neighbor.
Yet, even if we take the more stricter tradition,
in what manner that absolves us
from washing our hands before meals, I
see not.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nay, it is the same thing,</q> replied
Jesus. <q>Ye Pharisees make clean the
outside of the cup and platter, but your
inward thoughts are full of ravening and
wickedness. Ye fools! did not the Holy
One, blessed be He, who made that which
is without, make also that which is within?
Therefore give for alms that which is
within, kindly thoughts and friendly feelings.
If ye do that, all things are clean
unto you.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then I said unto Jesus, for this matter
touched us scribes nearly, <q>Master, in
speaking thus against tradition thou reproachest
us also that be scribes.</q>
</p>

<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>

<p>
And he answered, <q>Woe, woe unto ye,
scribes! which desire to walk in long
robes, and love greetings in the markets,
and the higher seats in the synagogues,
and the chief places at feasts, which devour
widows’ houses, and for a show make
long prayers.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then an angry murmur rose among all
the folk there assembled at the harsh
words of the stranger, when suddenly was
heard the voice of Simeon ben Lazarus,
the father of Elisha, a very old man, who
sat in the corner and said:—
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Young man, fourscore years and two
have I lived upon this earth; a Pharisee
have I been from the day I became a son
of the covenant, like little Lazarus there; a
scribe was I during all the working days of
my life. I did what the Law and the Sages
command, yet never thought I in so doing
of men’s thoughts or praises. Surely, if
the Lord command, a good Jew will obey.
And as in many things, many acts of this
life, the Law speaketh not in plain terms,
surely we should follow the opinion of
those who devote all their life to the study
of the Law.</q>
</p>

<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">I have never sought the praises of
men, their greetings or their honors, in
obeying the Law. In all that I have done
I have sought one thing—to fulfil the
will of our Father which is in heaven.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">As for what thou sayest, that inward
thought and outward act should go together
in the service of God and man, that
is a verity, and often have I heard the saying
from the great Hillel—may his memory
be for a blessing! But if outward act
may be clean when inward thought may
be unclean, how, on the other hand, can
we know the purity of what is within,
except it be decided by the cleanliness of
what is without? How, above all, shall
we teach our little ones, like my Lazarus
there, to feel what is good and seemly,
except by first teaching them to do the
acts that are seemly and good?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And as for what thou sayest as to the
hypocrisy of us Pharisees and scribes, I
say unto thee,—and in a few days I must
see the face of my Maker,—I say unto
thee, I have known many an Ebionite,
which thou seemest to be, who was well
spoken within, but ill doing without. So,
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>too, I have known many a scribe and
many a Pharisee who neither carried their
good deeds on their shoulders, nor said,
<q>Wait, I have to finish some godly deed;</q>
nor set off their good deeds against their
sins; nor boasted of their sacrifices for
godly works; nor did they seek out their
sins that they might pay for them by their
virtues; nor were they Pharisees from fear
of the Divine punishment. They were
Pharisees from love of the Lord, and did
throughout their life what they knew to
be his commands.</q>
</p>

<p>
But Jesus spoke gently unto the old
man, and said naught but, <q>Nay, master, I
spoke not of thee, nor of men like thee.
These be the true Pharisees; the rest but
have the Pharisaic color.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That is so,</q> said old Simeon. <q>I
have heard what King Jannaus said:
<q>Fear not the Pharisees, nor those who
are no Pharisees; but fear the colored
ones, who are only Pharisees in appearance,
who do the deeds of Zimri and demand
the rewards of Phineas.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
But before the old man could finish
there was a movement at the doorway,
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>and a high, thin voice cried out, <q>Where
is this kidnapper of souls? where is this
filcher of young lives? where is Jesus the
Nazarene?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Behold me,</q> said Jesus, turning towards
the voice; and an old man, with the
rent garment of the mourner, and with
hair all distraught, came up to the Nazarene
with arms outstretched and clutching
fingers.
</p>

<p>
<q>Give me my son, my Elchanan!</q> he
cried. <q>Thou hast taken him from me last
Passover, saying, <q>Father and mother, yea,
all that a man hath, shall he give up to
follow me.</q> He left me to follow thee;
what hast thou done with him?—my
Elchanan! my Elchanan!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He died, and is at peace.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Then give him back to me again.
Thou canst do all things, men say: make
whole the sick, let see the blind, cause the
lame to walk, and give peace to the
troubled mind. Give me, then, back my
Elchanan thou hast taken from me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There is One alone that can quicken
the dead,</q> said Jesus, and walked sternly
past him.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
<index index="toc" level1="IX. Jesus in the Temple"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="IX. Jesus in the Temple"/>
<head>IX.<lb/>JESUS IN THE TEMPLE.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg112'/>

<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>

<p>
But a few days after what I have narrated
to thee, I had attended a full meeting
of the Sanhedrim in the hall of hewn stones
in the Priests’ Court of the Temple. When
the session was over, we went forth, and,
turning to the right, passed into the Court
of the Israelites, and so through Nicanor’s
Gate into the Court of the Women. Now,
as we went down the fifteen steps that lead
into this court, we could see, through the
Beautiful Gate at the other end of it, that
something unusual was occurring in the
outer court of all, the Court of the Gentiles.
So I and some of the other younger members
of the Sanhedrim passed rapidly
through the Court of the Women, and,
hurrying through the Beautiful Gate, found
Jesus preaching to the people under Solomon’s
Porch. Now, it is usual for the
people to make way when any member of
the Sanhedrim passes by; but the people
were so engrossed with the words of Jesus
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>that they took no note of me and my companions,
and we had to stand at the edge
of the crowd and listen as best we might,
and so great was the crowd that I could
scarcely hear what the Nazarene was saying,
until gradually those near us, recognizing
the marks of our dignity, made way for
us till we got nearer.
</p>

<p>
Never saw I Jesus in so exalted a state.
Though he was not tall, as I have said, he
seemed to tower above the crowd. The
mid-day sun of winter was shining full upon
the Temple, and though Jesus was in the
shadow of the porch, the sunlight from the
Temple walls shone back upon his eyes
and hair, which gleamed with the glory of
the sun. He looked and spake as a king
among men. And, indeed, he was claiming
to be something even greater than a
king. I could not hear very distinctly from
where I was at first, but towards the last,
as I got nearer, I heard him say these
words:—
</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 2; margin-bottom: 2">
<q>Whosoever committeth sin is the servant
of sin. Except a man be born again,
he cannot see the kingdom of God. He
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>that loveth his life shall lose it. If a man
keep my word he shall never see death,
but has passed from death unto life. He
that believeth in me, the works that I do
shall he do also. Yet can the Son do
nothing of himself, but what he seeth the
Father do. I am the door: by me, if any
man enter in, he shall be saved. I am the
Way, the Truth, and the Life. I am the
Light of the world. I am the good Shepherd,
and know my sheep, and am known
of mine. I am the Bread of Life: he that
cometh to me shall never hunger. I am
the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman.
I am the Vine, ye are the
branches. If any man thirst, let him come
unto me and drink. Before Abraham was
I am.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now, as Jesus was saying these words,
and many like unto them, his form seemed
to expand, his eye flashed with the light of
prophecy, and all men were amazed at the
power of his words. Never had they heard
man speak of himself with such confidence.
If he had been very God, he could not have
said more of his own power over men’s
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>souls. Our prophets have spoken boldly
indeed, but none of them had boasted of
the power of the Lord in such terms as this
man spake of himself. Could he be mad,
I thought, to say such things? Yet in all
other matters he had shown a wisdom and
a sound sense equal to the greatest of our
Sages. Or had he found that by speaking
thus of himself, men, and above all, women,
were best moved to believe as he would
have them believe, to act as he would have
them act? Might it not be the simplest
of truths that for them, to them, he was
indeed the Way, the Truth, and the Life?
</p>

<p>
And, indeed, when I looked around and
saw the effect of his words on those who
were listening, I could in part understand
his power among men and women. They
drank in his words as travellers at the well
of the oasis. They lived upon his eyes,
and it was indeed strange to see every
man’s body bent forward as of a straining
hound at the chase. If ever men worshipped
a man, these were worshipping
Jesus.
</p>

<p>
And I? What was it with me that his
words failed to move me as they did those
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>around me? Why did his eyes rather repel
than attract me? Was it thy teaching,
Aglaophonos, that had taught me the
way of thy race: to measure all things in
the balance of wisdom; to be moved in
all acts by reason, not feeling? Was it
from thee I learnt to think about the
causes of this man’s influence, even while
I and others were under it? Perhaps not
alone; for much that this man was saying
would have repelled my Jewish instincts
even had I never come under thy influence.
What struck thee among us Jews,
I remember, was that while we see the
Deity everywhere, we localize him nowhere.
Alone among the nations of men
we refuse to make an image of our God.
We alone never regarded any man as God
Incarnate. Those among us who have
been nearest to the Divine have only
claimed to be—they have only been recognized
to be—messengers of the Most
High. Yet here was this man, as it
seemed, claiming to be the Very God,
and all my Jewish feeling rose against the
claim.
</p>

<p>
Nor was I alone in this feeling I was
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>soon to learn. Before Jesus had finished
his harangue, cries arose from different
quarters of the crowd. <q>Blasphemy!</q>
<q>Blasphemer!</q> <q>He blasphemes!</q> arose
on all sides. These cries awakened men
as if from a sleep, all turning round to
see whence they came. And the very
turning round, as it were, removed them
from the influence of Jesus and his eyes.
In a moment, many of those who just
before were hanging upon Jesus’ words
joined in the cry, <q>Blasphemer! blasphemer!</q>
One of the boldest of those
who began the cry called out, <q>Blasphemer!
Stone him!</q>
</p>

<p>
But Jesus drew himself up, and looked
upon the crowd with flashing eyes, and
said, <q>O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! Sodom is
justified of thee.</q> For a moment all were
silent, but soon the cries arose again:
<q>Blasphemer! blasphemer! Stone him!</q>
</p>

<p>
Then began great commotion among
the people. While some called out,
<q>Stone him!</q> <q>Stone him!</q> others
cried, <q>Sacrilege!</q> <q>Sacrilege!</q> <q>No
stoning in the Temple!</q> And one called
out with a jeer, <q>In the Temple ye cannot
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>stone, for lo! here there be no stones;</q>
and a bitter, scornful laugh followed his
words. Then some who were nearest to
Jesus sought to lay hands on him, while
others, his friends, stood round him and
prevented their approaching, and all was
confusion and tumult. When suddenly
the blare of a trumpet sounded through
the courts, and all cried, <q>The Romans!
the Romans!</q>
</p>

<p>
Then round by the royal porch came a
company of Roman soldiers to change the
sentries at mid-day, and they halted near
the Beautiful Gate. And as they came
near the crowd began to disperse, and
Jesus and his friends went their way from
the courts of the Temple.
</p>

<p>
That day, there was no talk in Jerusalem
but of the event in the Temple. Men
marvelled at the way in which this Jesus
had spoken of himself. <q>The prophets
spake not thus,</q> they said. <q>Yet how
can a man be greater than a prophet, who
speaketh the words of the Most High?
Even if we had once more a king over us
in Israel, he could not be as great as a
prophet, and no king would speak of
him<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>self as Jesus this day hath spoken of himself.</q>
But what if this man were destined
to be the Christ, the God-given Ruler that
should restore the throne of David? But
how could that be, since none of the signs
and portents of the last times had come
upon the earth? Who had seen the blood
trickle from the rocks? or the fiery sword
appear in the midnight sky? Had babes
a year old spoken like men? But others
said, <q>Nay, the kingdom of God will not
come with expectation. As it hath been
said, <q>Three things come unexpectedly—a
scorpion, a treasure-trove, and the Messiah.</q></q>
And again, others said, <q>Perchance
this is not the Messiah ben David,
but the Messiah ben Joseph, who shall be
slain before the other cometh.</q> Thus the
minds of men and their words went hither
and thither about the sayings of this man
Jesus in the Temple.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
<index index="toc" level1="X. The Entry into Jerusalem"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="X. The Entry into Jerusalem"/>
<head>X.<lb/>THE ENTRY INTO JERUSALEM.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg122'/>

<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>

<p>
I heard naught and saw naught of Jesus
the Nazarene till the very last week of his
life, and that was the week before the Passover.
The winter had been a severe one,
and much misery had arisen among the
folk through the exactions of the Romans;
indeed, an attempt had been made to throw
off the Roman yoke. In several places the
people had assembled in arms and attacked
the soldiery, and in some cases had slain
their sentries. Pilate had but sent off a
cohort into the district, and all signs of
discontent went underground. One of the
leaders of the revolt, Jesus Bar Abbas, had
been captured and thrown into prison.
He, indeed, had attempted an insurrection
in Jerusalem itself, where he was well
known and popular among the common
folk. When he was arrested, a riot had
occurred, and one of the soldiers was slain
who had been sent to arrest him; wherefore
he lay now in prison on the charges of
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>rebellion and murder. Yet many thought
that this man had been put forth to try the
temper of the people and the power of the
Romans, in preparation for a more serious
attempt to shake off the oppressor.
</p>

<p>
Yet who should lead the people? Jochanan,
the only man whom of recent times
the people followed gladly, had been done
to death by Herod. One man alone since
his death had won the people’s heart, to
wit, Jesus the cousin of Jochanan. He,
and he alone, could lead the people against
the Romans, and all men wondered if he
would. In the midst of their wonder came
news that Jesus the Nazarene was coming
up to the Holy City for the Feast of Passover,
the feast of redemption from Egypt.
Would it prove this year a feast of redemption
from the Romans? All hope of this
depended upon this Jesus.
</p>

<p>
It was twenty-one years ago, but I can
remember as if it were yesterday the excitement
in Jerusalem when the news came
that Jesus of Nazareth had arrived in the
neighborhood, and was spending his Sabbath
at the village of Bethany. All those
who were disaffected against the Romans
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>cried out, <q>A leader! a leader!</q> All those
who were halt, sick, or blind, cried out, <q>A
healer! a healer!</q> Wherever we went,
there was no talk but of the coming deliverance.
As I approached one group of
men I heard them say, <q>When will it be?
When will he give the sign? Will it be
before or after the feast?</q> <q>Nay,</q> said
one of the crowd, a burly blacksmith he,
<q>what day for the deliverance but the
Passover day? But be it when it may, let
him give the sign, and I shall be ready.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And prove a new Maccabee,</q> said one
in the crowd, referring to his hammer,
whereat a grim laugh arose.
</p>

<p>
The next day being the first of the
week, which the Romans call the Day of
the Sun, I was pondering the words of the
Law in my little study chamber near the
roof of my father’s house in the Street of
the Bakers near Herod’s Palace, which at
that time was inhabited by the Procurator,
when suddenly I heard the patter of many
feet in the street beneath me, and looking
out, I saw them all hurrying, as it seemed,
to the Temple. I put on my sandals, and
taking my staff in my hand and drawing
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>my mantle over my head, hurried out after
the passers-by. But when they came to
the Broad Place before the Water Gate,
they turned sharp to the right, and went
down the Tyropœon as far as the Fountain
Gate, where I overtook them. There I
found all the most turbulent of the city
population. Some of the men I knew had
been engaged in the recent riot under
Jesus Bar Abbas. Others were the leading
Zealots in Jerusalem, and all were men
eager for the freeing of the city from the
Romans. And among them, too, were
others who cared not for freedom, nor
hated the Romans, but would only be too
pleased if the city were given up to disorder
and rapine. While these waited there,
we heard cries from behind us, and looking
back, saw filing out from the Temple courts
on to the Xystus Bridge, and down into
the Tyropœon, the brigade of beggars who
pass almost their whole life in the Court of
the Gentiles. These came down slowly,
for among them were many halt and some
blind, and all were old and feeble of limb.
<q>Why come they forth from the courts?</q>
I asked; <q>and why are we waiting?</q>
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>Then said one near me, <q>Knowest thou
not that Jesus the Nazarene enters the
city to-day? And men say he is to deliver
us.</q> And at that moment a cry arose
among the folk, <q>Lo! there he is.</q> Looking
south, for a time I could see nothing,
for the mid-day sun of the spring solstice
was shining with that radiance which we
Jews think is only to be seen in our land.
But after a while I could discern, turning
the corner of the Jericho Road near En
Rogel, a mounted man, surrounded by a
number of men and women on foot. <q>It
is Jesus—it is Jesus!</q> all cried; <q>let us
to meet him!</q> And with that, all but the
lame rushed forward to meet him, and I
with them.
</p>

<p>
It is but three hundred paces from the
Fountain Gate to En Rogel, and the Nazarene
and his friends had advanced somewhat
to meet us, but in that short space
the enthusiasm of the crowd had arisen to
a very fever, and as we neared him one
cried out, and all joined in the cry, <q>Hosanna
Barabba! Hosanna Barabba!</q> and
then they shouted our usual cry of welcome,
<q>Blessed be he that cometh in the
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>name of the Lord!</q> and one bolder than
his fellows called out, <q>Blessed be the coming
of the kingdom!</q> At that there was
the wildest joy among the people. Some
tore off branches of palms, and stood by
the way and waved them in front of Jesus;
others took off each his <foreign rend='italic'>talith</foreign> and threw it
down in front of the young ass on which
Jesus rode, as if to pave the way into the
Holy City with choice linen. But when I
looked upon the face of Jesus, there were
no signs there of the coming triumph; he
sat with his head bent forward, his eyes
downcast, and his face all sad. And a
chill somehow came over me. I thought
of that play of the Greeks which thou
gavest me to read, in which the king of
men, driving to his own palace at Argos,
is enticed to enter it, stepping upon soft
carpets like an idol of your gods, and so
incurs the divine jealousy.
</p>

<p>
As we approached the Fountain Gate,
the beggars from the Temple had come
down to it, and joined in the shouting
and the welcome; and one of them,
Tobias ben Pinchas by name, who had,
ever since men had known him, walked
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>with a crutch, suddenly, in his excitement,
raised his crutch and waved it over his
head, and danced before Jesus, crying,
<q>Hosanna Barabba! Hosanna Barabba!</q>
and all men cried out, <q>A miracle, a miracle!
what cannot this man perform?</q>
And so, with a crowd surrounding him,
Jesus entered Jerusalem and went up into
the Temple. But I that year had been
appointed one of the overseers who distributed
the unleavened bread to the poor
of the city for the coming Passover, and
I had then to attend the meeting of my
fellow-overseers.
</p>

<p>
That night there was no talk in Jerusalem
but of the triumphant entry of Jesus.
The city was crowded by Israelites who
had come up to the capital for the festival,
and a whisper went about that many of
the strangers had been summoned by
Jesus to Jerusalem to help in the coming
revolt. During that night, wherever
a Roman sentry stood, a crowd of the
unruly would collect round him and jeer
at him; and in one place the sentry had
to use his spear, and wounded one of the
crowd. So great was the tumult that,
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>when the sentries were changed for the
midnight watch, a whole company of soldiers
accompanied the officer’s guard and
helped to clear the streets. Meanwhile,
where was Jesus? And what was he
doing in the midst of this tumult? I
made inquiry, for perchance he might
have been holding disputations about the
Law, as is the custom with our Sages; but
I learnt that he had left the city at the
eleventh hour, and gone back to the village
of Bethany, where he was staying.
But I was thinking through all that evening
of the strange contrast between the
triumphant joy of his followers and the
saddened countenance of the Nazarene.
</p>

<p>
Men knew not what was to become of
this movement in favor of him. Most of
the lower orders were hoping for a rising
against the Romans to be led by this Jesus.
Shrewder ones among the Better
thought that the man was about to initiate
a change in the spiritual government of
our people. Some thought he would depose
the Sadducees, and place the Pharisees
in their stead. Others feared that
he would carry into practice the ideals
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>of the <foreign rend='italic'>Ebionim</foreign>, and raise the Poor against
the Rich. Others said, <q>Why did he not
enter by the gate of the Essenes, for he
holdeth with them?</q> All knew that the
coming Passover would be a trying time
for Israel, owing to the presence of the
man Jesus in Jerusalem, and the manifest
favor in which he was held by the common
folk. But amidst all this I could see
only the pale, sad face of Jesus.
</p>


<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XI. The Cleansing of the Temple"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XI. The Cleansing of the Temple"/>
<head>XI.<lb/>THE CLEANSING OF THE <corr sic="TEMPLE">TEMPLE.</corr></head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg134'/>

<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>

<p>
On the morrow, being the second day
of the week, which the Romans call the
Day of the Moon, Jesus of Nazara came
early into Jerusalem, and as soon as it was
known that he had entered the city, all
those that had gone out to greet him on
the previous day, and many more with
them who had heard of the miracle that
he had performed, went to meet him in
the Broad Place. And near upon the
time of the mid-day sacrifice, Jesus and all
these men went up to the Temple.
</p>

<p>
Now, I have told thee how, when Jesus
had first come to Jerusalem, he had driven
forth from the Court of the Gentiles all
those who were engaged in selling beasts
of sacrifice, or in changing foreign moneys
for the shekels. But the money-changers
and others had been replaced by the
orders of the High Priest Hanan, and
nothing had come of this action, nor in
his later visits to Jerusalem had he done
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>aught in the matter, and it was thought
that he had acknowledged the right and
the power of the priests to have the monopoly
of the sale of sacrifices. Now,
that day of the Moon was the tenth day of
the month Nisan, and upon it were purchased
all the lambs for the forthcoming
Passover sacrifices, as it is said in the
Law, <q>In the tenth day of this month
they shall take to them every man a lamb
according to the house of their fathers,
a lamb for an house.</q> As this Paschal
sacrifice is the only home sacrifice of us
Jews, thou mightest imagine that each
householder could obtain his lamb whence
he would; but the priests say <q>No</q> to
this, for if a man could take any chance
lamb, it might not be without blemish.
So it had grown to be a custom that, on
the morning of the tenth day of Nisan,
the heads of households in Jerusalem
should wend their way to the courts of
the Temple, there to select each man a
lamb. And the priests had their profit
in this, for they claimed from those who
sold the lambs dues for every animal allowed
to be in the courts. And the sellers
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>again were agreeable to this, for none that
had not the favor could sell the Paschal
lambs. Whence it was that the price of
a lamb in the Paschal week was more than
three times as much as at any time of the
year, and the poorer people murmured
greatly.
</p>

<p>
Thus it happened that upon this day,
when Jesus came into the courts of the
Temple, these were crowded with all the
householders of Jerusalem, and much chaffering
and haggling was going on in the
purchase of the lambs for the Passover.
But Jesus, with the favor he had won
from the people, was for this day at least
Ruler of Jerusalem, and men wondered
what he would do with regard to this sale
and purchase of the beasts of sacrifice;
for on his first coming to Jerusalem, as I
have told thee, he had driven the sellers
away, but afterwards, when they had been
restored to their places, he had seemed to
acquiesce. What would he do now, men
thought, as they saw him advancing over
the Xystus Bridge, the head of a vast concourse
of people who would do all that he
told them?
</p>

<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>

<p>
They had not long to wait, for no
sooner had he entered the Temple courts,
than he spake to those around him, and
ordered them to remove the tables of the
money-changers, with their weights and
scales, without which no purchase could
be; and no man dared say him nay, for
all knew that the people were with him.
And they, indeed, were rejoiced, for they
took this as permission to buy their Paschal
lambs where they would; and many
of those who had been bargaining in the
courts of the Temple went off at once to
the market, and got them their lambs from
thence. All this I heard of in the inner
courts of the Temple, for it chanced that
day that I had to offer a sin offering, and
was waiting my turn in the Court of the
Israelites while the priests were preparing
the mid-day sacrifice. And I saw one
coming up to Hanan and to Joseph Caiaphas,
who were presiding over the sacrifice,
and they spake earnestly to one
another, and stopped the sacrifice, and
came through the Court of the Israelites
and went down the Court of the Women,
and all of us followed them thither. And
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>when we came to the Beautiful Gate, and
turned to the right round the corner of
the Temple, behold, we saw the flocks of
Paschal lambs being driven through the
Western Gates. And in the midst of the
court stood Jesus, surrounded by a multitude
clamoring and shouting. Then saw
I Hanan lean over to Joseph Caiaphas,
his son-in-law, and speak somewhat to him.
Then the latter advanced in front of the
priests and the scribes, who had come
forth with him, and asked, <q>Who hath
done this?</q> And Jesus said, <q>It is I.</q>
Then spake Joseph again and said, <q>Tell
us, by what authority doest thou these
things? And who gave thee this authority?</q>
</p>

<p>
Now, Joseph the High Priest was clad
this day in the robes of his office, with
tiara on head, the ephod on his breast,
and silver bells and pomegranates round
the edge of his garment. Whereas Jesus
the Nazarene wore his wonted garb of a
common country workman. Yet for the
moment this common workman was the
greater power of the two; since all men
knew how he had been received by the
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>people when he had come into Jerusalem,
and that what he willed, all the people of
Jerusalem willed also at that time. So all
were hushed to hear what this Jesus would
say to the question of the High Priest,
since now they thought he must declare
himself, and justify the power he was exercising.
</p>

<p>
But here again, as on former occasions,
Jesus answered not directly to the question
of the priests, but rather questioned them.
He said, <q>I also ask you one thing, which
if ye tell me, I likewise will tell you by
what authority I do these things. The
baptism of Jochanan, was it from heaven
or of men? Answer me.</q> And they answered
and said unto Jesus, <q>We cannot
tell.</q> Then said Jesus unto them, <q>Then
neither will I tell by what authority I do
these things. To what is the matter like?
There was a man had two sons. And the
man came to the first, and said, <q>My son,
go work in my vineyard.</q> But he said, <q>I
will not.</q> Howbeit afterward he repented,
and went to work. But the man went to
the second, and spake in like manner. But
he answered, <q>I go, sir.</q> But yet he went
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>not. Whether of these twain did the will
of his father?</q> And we all answered,
<q>The first.</q> Then Jesus looked slowly
around at us all, and said, <q>This I say
unto you, the publicans and harlots enter
into the kingdom of heaven before you.
For Jochanan came unto you in the way
of righteousness, and ye heeded him not,
but the harlots and the publicans heeded
him: but ye, even when ye saw this, repented
not.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now, at this public insult to all of
priestly rank, I saw dart forward Hanan
the High Priest, as if he would have rent
the man Jesus. But Caiaphas his son-in-law
caught him by the wrist, and whispered
words in his ear. But Hanan broke
loose, and called out in a loud voice, <q>My
guard, my guard!</q> Whereat many of the
folk who had come with Jesus into the
Court of the Gentiles came forward round
him, and put their hands to their weapons.
He indeed said naught, nor seemed
aware of the conflict that threatened.
But Caiaphas turned, and in a loud voice
said, <q>I go to perform the mid-day sacrifice,</q>
and walked slowly out of the court
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>back to the Temple. And we all followed
him.
</p>

<p>
Now, when we returned from performing
the sacrifice, Jesus had left the courts
of the Temple, which had become bare
and empty of people. And as I went
homeward to my house in the Street of
the Bakers, I looked down from the
Xystus Bridge, and saw trooping down
the Tyropœon Jesus and a great multitude
of the people, who crowded round him,
as if eager to touch the hem of his garment.
I stood and watched till they
reached the Fountain Gate, through which
he passed; and shortly afterwards I could
see him on the road to the Fountain of
Rogel, still accompanied by many of the
people.
</p>

<p>
What was to come of that day’s work I
knew not. For the first time the discontent
of the common folk with the management
of the Temple by the priests
had come to a head, and had resulted in
this open conflict between Jesus and the
High Priests. The city was full of strangers
excited by thoughts of the coming
festival. The common people had not yet
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>calmed themselves from the thoughts of rebellion
which had been raised by the rising
of Jesus Bar Abbas and others. The
whole city was as tow ready for the spark
of fire.
</p>

<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XII. The Woes"/><index index="pdf" level1="XII. The Woes"/>
<head>XII.<lb/>THE WOES.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg146'/>

<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>

<p>
Now, on the morrow, being the third
day of the week, Jesus of Nazara came
again into the city, and the rumor of his
coming spread through all the streets and
places of Jerusalem. And going forth
after the morning prayers, I found Jesus
with many around him in the Broad Place
before the Water Gate. And as I approached
near to them, I saw the crowd
part asunder and a procession coming
through, and almost all the men there
bowed and did reverence to the men who
were passing through. Now, these were
mostly of the Pharisaic sect, who were
going to the Great Beth Hamidrash, to
pursue the study of the Law and to give
decisions on legal questions which the
common folk put to them. And at their
head walked Jochanan ben Zaccai, the President
of the Tribunal. He was regarded
as the most capable exponent of the Law
since the death of Hillel, whose favorite
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>pupil he had been, and men were wont to
refer to him for decision in all the most
difficult questions of life. He was walking
at the head of the procession in his long
<foreign rend='italic'>talith</foreign> with large borders and in his broad
phylacteries. And he passed Jesus with a
salutation, indeed, but in it was mingled
some of the pride and contempt with which
the masters of the Law regarded all those
whom they call the Country-folk.
</p>

<p>
When these had passed, Jesus turned
round to the people, and spake these words:
</p>

<p rend="margin-top: 2">
<q rend="post: none">The scribes and the Pharisees sit in
Moses’ seat: all therefore whatsoever they
bid you observe, that observe and do; but
do not ye after their works: for they say,
and do not. For they bind heavy burdens
and grievous to be borne, and lay them on
men’s shoulders; but they themselves will
not move them with one of their fingers.
But all their works they do for to be seen
of men: they make broad their phylacteries,
and enlarge the borders of their garments,
and love the chief place at feasts,
and the chief seats in the synagogues, and
greetings in the markets, and to be called
of men, <q>Rabbi, Rabbi.</q></q>
</p>

<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">But be not ye called Rabbi: for One
is your Master, and all ye are brethren.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">And call no man your father upon the
earth: for One is your Father, which is
in heaven.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Neither be ye called Masters, for One
is your Master.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">But he that is greatest among you shall
be your servant. And whosoever shall exalt
himself shall be abased; and he that
shall humble himself shall be exalted.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom
of heaven against men: for ye neither
go in yourselves, neither suffer ye them
that are entering to go in.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye devour widows’ houses,
and for a pretence make long prayers:
therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye compass sea and land
to make one proselyte, and when he is
made, ye make him twofold more the child
of hell than yourselves.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Woe unto you, blind guides, which say,
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/><q>Whosoever shall swear by the Temple, it
is nothing; but whosoever shall swear
by the gold of the Temple, he is bound!</q>
Ye fools and blind! for whether is greater,
the gold, or the Temple that sanctifieth
the gold? And, <q>Whosoever shall swear
by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever
sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is
bound!</q> Ye fools and blind! for whether
is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth
the gift? Whoso, therefore, shall
swear by the altar, sweareth by it, and by
all things thereon. And whoso shall swear
by the Temple, sweareth by it, and by him
that dwelleth therein. And he that shall
swear by heaven, sweareth by the throne
of God, and by him that sitteth thereon.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and
anise and cummin, and have omitted the
weightier matters of the Law, judgment,
mercy, and faith; these ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the other undone.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Ye blind guides, which strain out the
gnat and swallow a camel!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye make clean the outside
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>of the cup and of the platter, but within
they are full of extortion and excess. Thou
blind Pharisee! cleanse first that which is
within the cup and platter, that the outside
of them may be clean also.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited
sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful
outward, but are within full of dead men’s
bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye
also outwardly appear righteous unto men,
but within ye are full of hypocrisy and
iniquity.</q>
</p>

<p rend="margin-bottom: 2">
<q>Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! because ye build the tombs of
the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of
the righteous, and say, <q>If we had been in
the days of our fathers, we would not have
been partakers with them in the blood of
the prophets.</q> Fill ye up, then, the measure
of your fathers. Ye serpents, ye generation
of vipers, how can ye escape the
damnation of hell?</q>
</p>

<p>
And all the people were astonished at
these words, for in many of his sayings and
most of his actions Jesus had seemed to
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>incline more to the sect of the Pharisees
than to any other section of the house of
Israel. And, indeed, in the opening words
of his discourse he had granted their right
to interpret the Law and to lead the people.
Yet wherefore had he denounced them all
without distinction as men insincere and
void of truth? Hypocrites there were
among them as among other classes of
men. Often, indeed, their acts did not go
with their words; but of what man can
it be said that all his acts and words go
together? These men were occupied in
building a rampart to the Law, and holding
the fortress against enemies without
and dissensions within. Those ramparts
might confine our actions within a narrow
space, yet is it not well for all men to be
kept perforce in the path of duty? I know
thou thinkest otherwise, Aglaophonos.
Thy Master the Stagyrite has taught thee
that man should be a law unto himself;
but we Jews willingly bear the yoke of the
Law, because we believe it to be the yoke
of the Lord. And in this matter Jesus
had in every way shown himself to be a
Jew of the Jews. Why, then, was he so
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>in wrath against the interpreters of the
Law?
</p>

<p>
Yet were the common folk not displeased
at these sayings of Jesus; nay, rather they
applauded them. For in many ways our
Sages have failed to find favor with the
common folk of Israel; for besides that
they would regulate their lives at every
point, so that no man dare do this or do
that except in the way the Sages prescribe,
but chiefly the rabbis were out of favor with
the folk for that they did openly despise
and condemn all but those who were learned
in the Law. The unlearned they called the
Country-folk. Wherefore did the people
hear with pleasure the bitter words Jesus
spake against the scribes and the Pharisees.
</p>

<p>
The night of that same day an event
occurred which roused the city of Jerusalem
to a pitch of expectation such as I had
never seen there. Two young Zealots,
artisans, that were popular with their fellows
for their kindness of heart and good
humor, fell into an altercation with a Roman
officer near the Sheep Gate, not far
from Antonia, where all the Roman soldiers
lie. Without a word of warning, the
Ro<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>man officer drew his sword and killed one
of these young men, and when his companion
and the passers-by rebuked him, and
would have seized him to take him before
the procurator, he gave a signal, and a
multitude of soldiers poured forth from
Antonia and struck without mercy among
the crowd. Five were killed and many
were wounded, and the whole city was in
an uproar at this proof of Roman insolence.
<q>How long, O Lord?</q> the graybeards
said, raising their hands to heaven.
And the younger men said, <q>Let us but
wait the coming of Jesus the Liberator;
surely before the Passover he will free us
from the rule of the <foreign rend='italic'>Goyim</foreign>.</q>
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XIII. The Great Refusal"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XIII. The Great Refusal"/>
<head>XIII.<lb/>THE GREAT REFUSAL.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg156'/>

<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>

<p>
Thou canst imagine with what feelings
of expectation all Jerusalem awaited the
coming of Jesus next morning. Many of
the Pharisees had come together the eve
before, and spoken of the public insult
Jesus had given to their sect on the preceding
day. Hanan the High Priest, we
heard, had quarrelled furiously with his
son-in-law Joseph Caiaphas, for that he
had not allowed him to summon his guard
after the humiliation he had put upon
them in the Temple. Yet neither the
Pharisees nor the Sadducees who followed
the High Priests dared lay hands
upon this Jesus, because of the evident
favor in which he was held by the common
folk of Jerusalem, and above all by
the many from country parts who had
come up, like him, to spend the Passover
in the Holy City. Among all these there
was no talk but of Jesus the Liberator;
nay! many spake of him as Jesus the
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>Christ. And if he were indeed to be the
Christ, the King of Israel, the Founder of
the New Kingdom, it could not be that
he would suffer longer the yoke of the
Romans to lie upon the neck of Israel.
</p>

<p>
Yet there was one thing that perplexed
many, and opinion went hither and thither
among the minds of men concerning it.
The Christ who was to deliver Israel and
to rule over mankind, was he not to be
the son of David? Yet this Jesus was of
Galilee, where the admixture of blood had
been greatest in all Israel. <q>There is no
unleavened bread in all Galilee,</q> the scoffers
used to say, meaning thereby that
their genealogy was sprinkled with yeast,
as we call foreign admixture. And for
this man’s genealogy, who could declare
it? Many, indeed, as I have told thee,
thought him to have no right even to be
called son of his father. A <foreign rend='italic'>mamzer</foreign> shall
not sit in the congregation of Israel.
How, then, could one ascend Israel’s
throne?
</p>

<p>
When, therefore, Jesus came next morning
from his lodging in Bethany, all Jerusalem
turned out to welcome him, for the
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>Passover was coming anear, and if aught
was to be done to clear the city of the
Romans, it must be done quickly, must be
done on that day. Never saw I the courts
of the Temple so crowded as on that day
when I came thither, and found Jesus
standing in the Court of the Gentiles,
with almost all the leading men of Jerusalem
and many of the common folk surging
about him. Scarce room was left for
the Roman sentry to march his guard in
front of the Beautiful Gate. Yet he took
no heed of us barbarians, but with shield
and spear shouldered his way backward
and forward, backward and forward, a
sign to all men that the house of God
was in the hands of God’s enemies.
</p>

<p>
Never saw I the men of Jerusalem so
exultant as on that morning. Wherever
I looked, joy—a grim joy—was on every
man’s countenance, and there was no man
there but was armed, save only Jesus himself
and some ten or a dozen men who had
come with him from Bethany, and these,
indeed, were the only men who had not
shown joy. Never had I seen the Nazarene
with a countenance so saddened and
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>aweary. Yestermorn he had been flashing
with anger and indignation as he spake
his words against the Pharisees, but on
this day his force seemed to be spent, and
he appeared like one who had passed
through a great agony.
</p>

<p>
Now, as they were standing there, I saw
a man, one of the leaders of the Zealots,
armed as if for battle, go up and lay a
hand upon one of those with Jesus. He
spake eagerly with him, and pointed with
his thumb to the Roman soldier as he
passed to and fro. But the other shook
his head vehemently, and took his arm
away from the grasp of the Zealot and
turned his back upon him.
</p>

<p>
Now, at this moment certain of the
Pharisees came through the crowd and
advanced to Jesus. So great was the
crowd that I heard not at first what they
said unto him; but it must have been
some question about the matter that was
in all men’s minds, for I heard his reply,
and that, as was his wont, was in the form
of a counter-question to their inquiry, for
he said, <q>What think <hi rend='italic'>ye</hi> of the Christ?
Whose son is he?</q> And they, speaking
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>with the thought of all Israel, said, <q>The
Christ is the son of David.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then all men watched with expectancy
to hear what the Nazarene would say to
this; for if he agreed with them, then
would he deny himself to be the Christ:
for his genealogy had by no means been
proven. But yet, how could he disprove
the belief of all Israel, that the Christ was
the Son of David? Yet that did he after
the manner of our Sages, using words of
Scripture as his confirmation; for he said
unto them, <q>How then is it that David
himself saith in the Book of Psalms, <q>The
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my
right hand until I make thine enemies thy
footstool</q>? David therefore himself calleth
the Christ Lord; how then can the
Christ be his son?</q>
</p>

<p>
At this the Pharisees knew not what to
say, for no man had hitherto used that
<foreign rend='italic'>stichos</foreign> of the Psalms, and they knew not
what to reply. But the common folk
were rejoiced exceedingly; joy spread on
their faces, and I saw many a fist raised
and shaken in exultant defiance at the
Roman sentry, who walked hither and
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>thither on his guard as if he were a living
mass of steel.
</p>

<p>
Thereupon certain of the crowd who
were known to be followers of Herod had
speech with Jesus, and spake to him:
<q>Master, we know that thou art true, and
carest for no man; that thou regardest
not the person of men, but teachest the
way of God in all truth—tell us, therefore,
what thinkest thou: is it lawful to
give tribute to Cæsar or not? shall we
give, or shall we not give?</q> All men
were silent, and drew their breath to hear
what Jesus might say to this. For if he
claimed to be the Anointed One, to whom
but to the King of Israel should Israel’s
tribute be paid?
</p>

<p>
But he said unto them, <q>Why tempt ye
me? Bring me a denarius, that I may see
it.</q> And they brought one and put it
into his hand. And he held it forth unto
them, and said, <q>Whose is this image and
superscription?</q> And they answered,
<q>Cæsar’s.</q> And then Jesus said unto
them, <q>Render to Cæsar the things that
are Cæsar’s, and to God the things that
are God’s.</q> And these Herodians
mar<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>velled at the subtlety with which he had
answered them, but the common folk were
amazed and dumfounded at his answer.
And soon I heard one say to another, <q>He
denieth: he would pay tribute to Cæsar.</q>
And gradually all the men drew away from
him, leaving him alone with only the company
with him from Bethany.
</p>

<p>
But he, seeing this, turned to one of
those with him, and said, <q>Peter, of whom
do the kings of the earth take custom?
of their own children, or of the aliens?</q>
And Peter answered and said, <q>Of the
aliens.</q> Then Jesus said to him, <q>Then
are the children free?</q> And Peter said
to him, <q>Yes.</q> Then said Jesus unto him,
<q>Then do thou also give, as being an alien
to them.</q> The common folk heard this,
indeed, but were in no wise satisfied. If
they were to give tribute to the Romans
for whatever cause, they were still to be
under subjection to Rome, and then Jesus
refused to be their Liberator; that had
become clear to them of a sudden. And
they drew still further away from him.
And a deep silence of mortification fell
upon all men there, so that thou couldst
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>hear distinctly the tread of the Roman
sentry as he moved on his march.
</p>

<p>
Amid the deep silence suddenly came a
gentle tinkling, as of silver bells; it came
nearer and nearer, and a crier called out,
<q>Way for the High Priests!</q> Then Hanan
the High Priest, with Caiaphas his
son-in-law, and others of the priests accompanied
by their guard, came down the
steps from the Beautiful Gate. The Roman
sentry stopped his march and stood
upright, with spear on ground, and all
made way as the procession of the High
Priests passed through the court. All
men were silent, and thou couldst hear the
tinkling of the silver bells which were attached
to the hems of the High Priests’
garments. Hanan walked at the head of
the procession with his usual haughty
gait, and had nearly passed through the
court, when he saw Jesus and those with
him. At once he halted, and summoned
one of the crowd to him. Then we saw
much eager talk between this man and the
High Priest. And Hanan summoned the
captain of his guard, who would have
turned towards Jesus, but that Joseph
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>Caiaphas stayed him and spake unto Hanan,
pointing to the Roman sentry. After
much talk between these, the High Priests
resumed their march and left the Temple.
And all the other men began to pass away
from the court, leaving Jesus and his men
alone with none to listen to him. For the
word passed swiftly in the mouths of all
the men of Jerusalem,—<q>He refuseth;
he would have us be slaves of the Romans
forever.</q>
</p>

<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XIV. The Meeting of the Hananites"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XIV. The Meeting of the Hananites"/>
<head>XIV.<lb/>THE MEETING OF THE HANANITES.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg168'/>

<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>

<p>
The next day being the fifth day of the
week, and the thirteenth day of the month
Nisan in that year, many rumors went
about the city as to the man Jesus. There
were who said that he had been seized by
the guards of Hanan; others said that he
had left the village of Bethany and gone
no man knew whither. But for that day
Jesus came not into Jerusalem, and men’s
minds were occupied more with one of
the difficulties of our Law which form the
occupation and delight of our Sages. I
must explain this unto thee, for upon it
turn the events of the next day, so fateful
for the man about whom thou art inquiring.
Thou canst easily understand what
I shall say, for thou hast, I know, a copy
of the Scriptures in Greek, for did I not
procure it for thee?
</p>

<p>
It is said in the Law, thou wilt find, that
the Passover lamb is to be killed in the
twilight between the fourteenth and the
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>fifteenth of Nisan, and it is also said in our
Law that the whole of the lamb must be
consumed that evening. Now, in the
years when the fifteenth of Nisan, which
is the first day of the Passover, falleth
upon the Sabbath, the killing and roasting
of the lamb would take place on the Sabbath
eve, when no killing must take place
and no fire must be lit. Hence arises a
conflict of the Law of the Passover with
the Law of the Sabbath. Now, the older
view was, that the Passover was superior
to the Sabbath, and its law was to be followed
in preference. This the priests
held and followed, and in this they seemed
to have the authority of the great Hillel,
who also declared the Passover superior to
the Sabbath.
</p>

<p>
But many among the Pharisees and the
more pious preferred to slay the Passover
lamb on the eve between the thirteenth
and the fourteenth day of Nisan, and to
eat it on the fourteenth day; that is, in
those years when the Passover fell on the
Sabbath, as was the case in the year of
which I am now writing. It would appear
that Jesus and his followers held with the
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>latter opinion, for, as I have heard, on the
eve of the fourteenth of Nisan he came
stealthily into the city of Jerusalem, and ate
the Passover lamb concealed in an upper
chamber of one of his friends in the city.
It showeth how earnest this man was in
following the larger precepts of the Law,
though in smaller matters he seemed to
neglect it. For by this time he must
have known that he was no longer safe in
Jerusalem; and, indeed, he proved this by
his secret entry into it. Yet in order to
fulfil the Law, which saith, <q>The Passover
lamb is to be eaten in Jerusalem,</q> he
risked his own and his followers’ lives.
Yet was he careful of them; for, as thou
shalt soon hear, as soon as he had gone
through the meal prescribed by the Law,
he escaped out of Jerusalem.
</p>

<p>
Now, that night I was standing at the
door of my house, looking upon the city
bathed in the light of the moon, which
was near its full, when suddenly a man
seized me by the arm and said, <q>Thou
art wanted.</q> I looked, and behold it
was Simon Kantheros, my brother-in-law.
And I said to him, <q>Who wants me? and
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>wherefore?</q> And Simon answered me
and said, <q>Hanan the High Priest has
summoned suddenly a meeting of the
Sanhedrim at his house on the Mount of
Olives.</q> Then said I, <q>But if it be at his
house, it can only be the Priestly Sanhedrim
of Twenty-Three that he summons.</q>
<q>Nay, nay, man,</q> answered Simon, <q>the
case is urgent. He saith, <q>any member of
the Sanhedrim.</q> Come, then, with me,
and quickly.</q> So with that I seized my
mantle and my staff, and went forth with
him.
</p>

<p>
So we hurried across the market-place
towards the Fish Gate, and as we passed
near the Tower Antonia, we saw the flashing
of red lights, and heard hoarse cries of
command, and knew not what was toward.
But when we arrived at the Fish Gate, we
found them changing the sentries of the
first watch, and knew that the second
watch had begun. At first the sentry
would not let us through the gate; but
the officer was called, and Simon showed
him his badge as member of the Sanhedrim.
But even this would not have
sufficed, but that Simon then pointed to
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>his toga and the purple stripe, which
showed that he was a Roman citizen of
rank. Thereat the officer spake to the
sentry, and we passed through the gate,
and turned sharply to the right, and went
down the road which leads to the valley
of the Kidron. And as we were passing
the Brook Kidron, we looked and saw dots
of red light moving up the hill from the
Garden of Gethsemane. And as we advanced
up the hill of the Mount of Olives,
we could see from time to time these red
sparks preceding us; and when we came
within sight of the High Priest’s house,
we saw them enter in and disappear.
</p>

<p>
Soon we ourselves had come up to the
gate, and when we knocked, a wicket was
opened, and a face peered out, and our
names were asked. When we had told
them, the gate was closed, and we had to
wait some time. But at last the door was
opened, and the captain of the guard received
us. He took us through the passage
which led into the open court, with
the water-basin in the centre, round which
we skirted, and ascended the steps into
the inner house. And again we stopped
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>before the hall-door while our names were
asked, and again we had to wait till the
door was at last opened. Then at last we
entered the hall, and found Joseph Caiaphas
the High Priest and many of his
kinsmen seated round a long table. Caiaphas
rose, and motioned us to two seats
at the end of this table, and we seated
ourselves.
</p>

<p>
When my eyes had become accustomed
to the light, I looked round, and said the
greeting of peace unto those I knew of the
assembly. I can still remember many of
their names. There was Ishmael ben
Phabi, who had at first replaced Hanan as
High Priest. There were also the four
sons of Hanan—Eleazar, Jonathan, Theophilus,
and Matthias. Then there were
Kamithos the priest, and his two sons,
Simon and Joseph. And beside these, I
remember two men of my own generation—Elioni
ben Kantheros and Chananyah
ben Nedebai. Most of these men had
been, or were afterwards, High Priests,
and were all at this time members of the
Priestly Sanhedrim. On the left of Caiaphas
was a low stool, and, even as I looked,
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>Hanan ben Seth the High Priest came in
swiftly from a side door, and took a seat
thereon. He glanced sharply round at
each of us, counting our numbers, and we
were exactly three and twenty. And when
he saw me, he rose and spake somewhat
harshly, <q>Meshullam ben Zadok, what dost
thou here? This is a meeting of the
Priestly Sanhedrim. Thou art a son of
Israel.</q> And I answered and said, <q>Simon
Kantheros here, my kinsman, summoned
me to the meeting, saying that any member
of the Sanhedrim could attend.</q> The
High Priest thought for a moment—he
seemed as if he were counting us again—then
he said, <q>Be it so; thou art at least
a true son of Israel, and this is not a
formal meeting of the priests.</q> He sat
him down again, and we waited. At last
an attendant entered by the same door,
and, going up to the High Priest, spake
to him. He nodded quickly, and dismissed
him with a wave of his hand. And when
he had passed through the door, Hanan
the High Priest rose, and spake to us these
words:—
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Kinsmen and colleagues, ye have all
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>heard, if ye have not witnessed, how Jesus
of Nazara entered the Holy City on the
first day of this week, amid the acclamations
of his followers and many of the
lower people, who even went so far as to
hail him as the Deliverer. Now, to-morrow,
as ye know, is the Passover. Who
knows, if the thoughts of deliverance from
Egypt, which come at that time, may not
cause this man, or, if not him, his followers,
to attempt a rising against the Romans our
masters? We know that any such attempt
would be entirely futile, but the very attempt
itself would be the ruin of the nation.
Ye know the character of the man Pontius
Pilate. ’Tis but a short time since he slew,
of wanton cruelty, certain Galilæans, even
while they were making sacrifices, and all
for mere suspicion of disaffection. Ye cannot
but remember the building of Solomon’s
Aqueduct. Because money was
taken from the Temple treasury for the
building thereof, the people were inflamed,
and would have risen against them. What
did he but send his soldiers, disguised in
civil garb and armed with clubs, among the
people, when they came to make their
pro<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>test? And without warning, and in mere
wanton cruelty, did he give the signal for
massacre. If he did this at a mere threat
of a rising, what will happen should an
actual rising take place to-morrow? It is
our duty to see that such a calamity fall
not upon this nation because of the presence
of this rude provincial in our midst.
Better one man should die than the nation
should suffer. No time was to be lost,
and I therefore have had this Jesus arrested,
and he now awaits our pleasure in
the atrium.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Before I summon him to our presence,
I would briefly state to you what seems to
me and some of our friends here the right
course to be followed. We purpose to
hand him over at dawn to Pontius Pilate,
to deal with him as he will. For he, by
his spies, and by the demonstration on the
first day of the week, must be aware of
the danger of a rising to-morrow night,
caused by this man’s presence in our city.
Indeed, it is for the very purpose of preventing
a rising that he cometh up each
year about the Passover to Jerusalem.
Let it, then, be his care to prevent it how
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>he will; we shall have done our part, and
he cannot punish the nation, or us its
leaders.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">But some of you will say, Why should
we deliver this man up to the Romans,
perhaps, or even probably, to his death?
I say, that even apart from the danger
which he offers to the State, he is worthy
of death for his manifest blasphemies.
He speaketh of himself as very God, and
claims to be the Anointed One, and puts
aside the Law as it pleaseth him. I say
naught of his insolence in the Temple
cloisters, for this matter concerns us that
be priests, and in the matter of judgment
we must not take account of aught that
deals with our private concerns; yet it is
manifest that he hath no reverence for the
Lord’s house: witnesses shall prove to
you that he hath said he would sweep it
away and build another. I wonder not
that horror is expressed in your faces at
this blasphemy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend="post: none">Yet, as ye know, our Law hath in
mercy provided that none shall be condemned
unless on the testimony of witnesses.
The Law shall be fulfilled. Even
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>now, as I speak, one of his followers,
Judas, a man of Kerioth, is drawing forth
from him his blasphemies before two witnesses,
concealed, as is the custom. And
even if he fail, I know this man Jesus; in
his arrogance he will not scruple to repeat
his blasphemies, even before us.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Time presses, and I have but this to
add before the prisoner is summoned: it
is a wise provision of our Law, that in
capital charges no final condemnation
shall occur until the second day of the
trial. The day before the Passover began
this eve. If we keep to the Law, no condemnation
can take place till after the
first day of the Passover, by which time
all the mischance may have come to pass.
If the power of life and death were solely
in our hands, I would not depart in aught
from the wise provision of our forefathers;
but, in truth, if this man be put to death,
it will not be our doing, for his fate rests
with Pilate. I would remind the younger
members of the Sanhedrim that the final
decision is not with us, and if they vote
for this man’s death, as I cannot doubt
they will, considering the pressing danger
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>to our nation, they need not fear to be
called members of a bloodthirsty Sanhedrim,
since his death, if death he suffers,
will be at the hands of the Roman Procurator.
In this strait I propose, therefore,
to examine this man at once, and if, as I
doubt not, he avows his guilt, to wait till
the morning for his final condemnation,
and in this way fulfil the Law. Summon
the prisoner to our presence.</q> Then,
turning to Caiaphas, he said, <q>This is a
matter between us and the Romans, for
whom thou, Joseph, art the High Priest.
Take thou, then, the interrogatory.</q>
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XV. The Examination before the Sanhedrim"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XV. The Examination before the Sanhedrim"/>
<head>XV.<lb/>THE EXAMINATION BEFORE THE SANHEDRIM.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg182'/>

<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>

<p>
Then from the lower end of the hall
entered Jesus the Nazarene, with his arms
bound with withes behind his back, and
he was led by the captain of the guard up
to the centre of the table opposite Caiaphas
the High Priest. Then Caiaphas
rose, and, looking at a paper in his hand
which Hanan had given him, said unto
Jesus, <q>Jesus of Nazara, thou art accused
before us of blasphemy, and of leading the
people of Israel astray: what sayest thou
thereto?</q> Jesus gazed haughtily at him,
and answered, <q><hi rend='italic'>I</hi> spake openly to all the
world, I have taught in the synagogue and
in the Temple, and in secret I have said
nothing. Why askest thou me? Ask
them which heard me what I have said
unto them. Behold, they know what I
have said.</q> Then one of the men who
had led Jesus in struck him with the
palm of his hand, and said, <q>Answerest
thou the High Priest so?</q> But Jesus
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>turned, and said to him in a milder voice,
<q>If I have said aught that is evil, bear
witness thereof; but if well, why smitest
thou me?</q> And Caiaphas the High
Priest bade the man begone and bring
in the witnesses. Then one man came
forward and said he had heard Jesus call
himself the Son of God. And another,
that he had spoken of himself as if he
were very God, and could do all that the
Holy One, blessed be He, can perform.
And yet another came forward and said
he had heard Jesus speak of himself as
Son of Man, and had thereby, as he
thought, claimed to do what the Son of
Man is said to do in the Prophets Daniel
and Enoch. But no two of these witnesses
agreed as to time and seasons, as
is required by our Law. At last, however,
two of them declared that on the preceding
day in the Temple they had heard
him say, <q>I will destroy this Temple that
is made with hands, and in three days I
will build another without hands.</q> Now,
during all this time Jesus had said naught,
but looked before him with that rapt expression
that I had seen upon him on the
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>second occasion when I had heard him
preach in the synagogue of the Galilæans.
So Caiaphas the High Priest spake to
him, saying, <q>Answerest thou naught to
what these men witness against thee?</q>
And Jesus made as if he heard not.
</p>

<p>
Then Hanan the High Priest leaned
over to Caiaphas his son-in-law and spake
some words to him. Then Caiaphas, rising,
spake thus to Jesus: <q>Art thou the
Christ, the Son of the Holy One, blessed
be He?</q> Then Jesus raised his head,
and gazing fixedly at the High Priest,
said in a loud voice, <q>Thou hast said.
And hereafter ye shall see the Son of
Man sitting on the right hand of power,
and coming on the clouds of heaven.</q>
Then Hanan the High Priest rose and
rent his clothes, as is our wont in time
of mourning or when blasphemy is heard,
and he called out in his keen, shrill voice,
<q>What need we any further witnesses?
Ye have heard the blasphemy; what think
ye?</q> And he waved his hand to the
captain of the guard, who removed the
prisoner.
</p>

<p>
When the door was closed behind him,
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>Hanan said, <q>What need we of further
words? let us proceed to the judgment.</q>
And glancing over to Chananyah ben
Nedebai, he said, <q>Chananyah, thou art
the youngest; it is thine to pronounce
judgment first. Is not this man guilty of
death for his manifest blasphemy here before
us?</q> And Chananyah said, <q>Yea.</q>
And so said all till Hanan had called
upon thirteen to give judgment. Then
said Hanan, <q>This man is for certain condemned
to death, or at least to be handed
over to the Roman Procurator: for already
a majority of two have declared his death,
even if all the rest were for an acquittal,
as I cannot think possible. The Court
will rise and reassemble at the time of the
saying of the morning prayer, in order to
confirm this judgment. Ye will not have
long to wait, for even now I heard the
crowing of the cock, and the dawn cannot
be far off.</q>
</p>

<p>
Then the Court broke up, and many of
the younger members met together and
discussed the case. And I was somewhat
surprised to find that very few words of
compassion were raised for Jesus. The
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>stubborn conduct of the prisoner had set
them against him in the first place, and
his wild outburst had confirmed their ill
thoughts of him. But most of all they
were influenced by the thought that this
was but a preliminary trial, and could only
result in handing him over to the Roman
Procurator, with whom the last word
would be. None of them had seen aught
of Jesus but during the last few days in
the Temple, when he had interfered with
their order and prerogatives. I cannot
say I was convinced, either by Hanan’s
harangue at first, or by these men’s arguments
afterwards. But I was somewhat
perplexed, feeling myself in some wise an
intruder in their midst, not being of the
priestly order. And as is my custom in
such cases, I went out into the open air
down the steps into the atrium.
</p>

<p>
There I found a great fire had been lit in
the court, for the night was chilly. Near
the fire Jesus was seated, with the High
Priest’s guard around him. As I came
near, behold, one of the guard threw part
of his mantle across the face of Jesus so as
to blindfold him, and then struck him,
say<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>ing, <q>Thou art a Prophet; prophesy who
hath struck thee.</q> And all the soldiers
laughed and jeered. Then sought I the
captain of the guard and told him this, and
he said, <q>They mean naught of ill—they
be rude fellows; howbeit, I will stop them.</q>
And he went up to them and reproved
them. And I paced up and down the
courtyard, with the silent stars above and
the glowing fire beneath, till an apparitor
of the High Priest summoned me, saying,
<q>It beginneth to dawn at the back of the
house; the Council will resume its sitting.</q>
</p>

<p>
When I entered the council-chamber, I
found all seated as before, but in the midst
was a smaller table, at which was seated a
scribe, with a roll in front of him. Then
Hanan the High Priest came in, and said,
<q>Ye have all had the time of deliberation
prescribed by our sages in capital cases, or
at least as much time as the urgency of the
matter permits. We must proceed to the
formal ratification of this man’s sentence, for
I cannot doubt that ye will see fit to confirm
the righteous judgment which your
zeal for the Lord caused you to pass just
now upon this man. And again I would
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>bid you remember you are voting, not so
much for this man’s death, as whether he
is to be delivered to the Romans. Scribe,
read the roll.</q> And with that the scribe
began to read our names, and we all answered
to them. Then said Hanan, <q>We
will now proceed to the voting,</q> and called
upon Chananyah ben Nedebai to record
his vote. And he voted as before, for
death. Then each in his turn, and all
voted as before. And when my name was
called upon I arose and hesitated, and
Hanan looked over to me and said, <q>Thou
speakest here by our courtesy, Meshullam
ben Zadok; if thou disagree with the
unanimous opinion of thy colleagues, thou
hadst best instruct us in thy reasons.
What sayest thou? Is not he guilty of
death who is guilty of blasphemy against
the Most High?</q> <q>Yea,</q> said I. <q>And
was not this man Jesus manifestly guilty of
blasphemy before us?</q> <q>Yea,</q> said I.
Then said Hanan swiftly to the scribe,
<q>He voteth for death,</q> and waved me
down to my seat. And thereafter all the
remaining members of the Council voted
for death, finishing with Hanan as the
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>oldest, who merely gave a grim nod to the
scribe.
</p>

<p>
By this time it was quite light, and all
the Council and many of Hanan’s household
joined together to say the morning
prayers. After prayers most of the Council,
with Hanan and Caiaphas at our head,
followed the soldiers who guarded Jesus
down from the Mount of Olives. As we
came near the Brook Kidron, behold, a
man with haggard face darted out from
the shrubs by the wayside, and rushing up
to Hanan the High Priest, dashed down
at his feet a bag which chinked, and then
disappeared into the wayside again. But
Hanan only motioned with his finger to
the bag at his feet, and the captain of his
guard lifted it up and poured out its contents
into his hand, and, behold, it was a
number of new shekels from the Temple
treasury. Then Hanan smiled grimly, and
bade the captain put them aside. Thereupon
we resumed our march, and soon
came to the Aldgate. There we inquired
where the Procurator was, and learnt that
he had taken up his dwelling at the Palace
of Herod, so that he might be in Jerusalem
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>during the Passover, as was his wont, for
fear of a rising at that time. Then we
marched across and halted in front of the
palace. And on our way the rumor spread
throughout the city that Jesus the Nazarene
was being carried before the Procurator,
and soon our procession was joined by
all who were free from household duties.
I have explained to thee, have I not, how
that for those of the older opinion this sixth
day of the week was the day on which the
Paschal lamb was to be sacrificed, and for
all good Jews the morning would be devoted
to the final search after the leaven.
That morning, therefore, all the householders
of Jerusalem and all the heads of
families were occupied in the search after
leaven, or in preparation for the Paschal
sacrifice, and it was only the younger men,
and those who cared not for acts of piety,
who followed our procession on the way to
Herod’s Palace.
</p>

<p>
Now, all those of the Council were of
the older opinion as to the Paschal sacrifice,
and were about to perform it on the
evening of that day. Wherefore it behoved
them not to enter the dwellings of
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>the heathen during that day, since it is
their custom to bury the bodies of men in
their gardens or in their houses, which
render them a defilement to us Jews.
Therefore on the day of a sacrifice no Jew
may enter a heathen’s house, above all the
High Priest, upon whose sanctity the holiness
of the nation depends. When, therefore,
we came within twenty paces of the
Procurator’s dwelling, Hanan caused our
procession to halt, and a summons to be
sounded upon the trumpet. Thereat a
lictor appeared, who asked our business,
and to him Hanan gave a message to the
Procurator. And here for the first time
since he had been arrested I could see the
countenance of Jesus near me, and it surprised
me much to observe that all traces
of anxiety and weariness had disappeared
from it. He seemed relieved and resigned,
and paid no heed to what was passing
around him, seeming only to commune
with himself, or perhaps, I should say, with
some inward friend and comforter.
</p>

<p>
Then Pontius Pilate came forward and
spake to Joseph Caiaphas the High Priest,
and asked him what he would with him.
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>And Caiaphas answered and said, pointing
to Jesus, <q>This man have we captured and
brought unto thee, finding that he was perverting
the people, and declaring that he
was the Anointed One of Israel, and therefore
the rightful King of the Jews. Him
therefore have we brought to thee, seeing
it is a matter which toucheth our master
the Emperor.</q> Thereupon Pontius Pilate
turned round, and said something in the
barbarian tongue, and the guard of Roman
soldiers came forward and took Jesus from
the High Priest’s guard, and took him
with them up the steps of the palace.
Then Pilate courteously invited the High
Priests to enter the judgment-hall with
him; but they, in answer, pointed out that
on that holy day they dared not enter to
any house but their own and the house of
God. Then Pilate turned his back with
scanter courtesy, and reëntered the palace,
and we and the common people remained
outside waiting.
</p>

<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
<index index="toc" level1="XVI. Condemnation and Execution"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="XVI. Condemnation and Execution"/>
<head>XVI.<lb/>CONDEMNATION AND EXECUTION.</head>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg196'/>

<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>

<p>
And after a while of waiting, Pontius
Pilate reappeared, and coming down to
Caiaphas said, <q>He hath confessed; he
shall join the other criminals that are to
be executed this day.</q> Then one among
those who were waiting in the crowd
came forward unto Pilate, and said unto
him, <q>Master, it is a grace of our lord
the Emperor that at our Passover there
be released unto us one of the prisoners
that are condemned to death.</q> And
Pilate answered and said, <q>That is so:
whom will ye that I release?</q> And
many of those in the crowd called out,
<q>Jesus.</q> And Pilate stepped back, and
summoned to him a lictor. And shortly
after soldiers came forward in the portico,
bearing with them Jesus the Nazarene.
Upon him was a purple robe of royalty,
and upon his brow had been placed the
faded rose-wreath of some reveller which
had been put on in haste, and some of the
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>thorns had torn the flesh, and blood was
trickling down. When the people saw
him, many cried out, <q>Not this Jesus, but
Jesus Bar Abbas.</q> And one man among
the crowd called out, <q>Better Jesus Bar
Abba<note place="foot"><foreign rend='italic'>Bar Abba</foreign> means <q>son of his father.</q></note> than Jesus Bar 
Amma;</q><note place="foot"><foreign rend='italic'>Bar Amma</foreign> means <q>son of his 
mother.</q>—<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> and
laughter and jeers followed. Then Pilate
seemed puzzled, and called to him one of
his lictors, who spake earnestly to him for
a time, and then received an order from
him. And going up the steps, he entered
the palace. And shortly afterwards there
came forward the man Jesus Bar Abbas of
Jerusalem, of whom I have spoken to thee
before. Now, he had been very popular
among the folk, and had lost his liberty in
a rising against the Romans, in which a
Roman sentry had been slain. And there
stood the two Jesuses—the one that had
risen against the Romans, and the one
that had told the people they should pay
tribute to their Roman lords. It was
manifest that the new-comer, who had
done naught against the Romans, was
more in favor with Pilate the Procurator,
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>while the folk who had welcomed him on
the first day of the week, on this the sixth
day reviled and despised him because he
had refused to lead a rising against the
Romans as the other one had done. Then
Pilate called out to them and said, <q>Whom
will ye that I release unto you: Jesus
who is called Bar Abbas, or Jesus who is
called Christ?</q> And almost all the multitude
cried, <q>Jesus Bar Abbas! Jesus
Bar Abbas!</q> Then Pilate gave command,
and the soldiers took tack Jesus the Nazarene
into the palace again, while others
removed the fetters from Jesus Bar Abbas,
and he came down the steps and disappeared
among the crowd.
</p>

<p>
After a while, there came forward from
the side gate a company of Roman soldiers,
who took their stand in front of the
steps of the palace, moving the crowd
away therefrom. And shortly after, other
soldiers brought down from above three
men, each carrying two pieces of timber,
one fixed across the top of the other, like
unto the letter <foreign rend='italic'>tau</foreign>. One of these was
Jesus the Nazarene, clad once more in
his own garments, and without the
rose-<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>wreath; yet couldst thou see the mark
of the thorns upon his brow. The others
were, as I learnt, malefactors that had
been condemned for robbery.
</p>

<p>
Just at this moment one touched me on
the shoulder, and, turning, I found it was
one of the servants of my household, who
spake unto me and said, <q>Meshullam ben
Zadok, thy father would speak with thee.</q>
And as the house was not far off, I went
with him and spake to my father, who
would have me accompany him on the
search for leaven on that morn. For at
that time I was betrothed, and next year
I should have a house of my own, and
would have to conduct the search for
leaven as a master of a household. So I
went round the house with my father—peace
be upon him!—and searched for
the leaven.
</p>

<p>
By the time the search for the leaven
had been concluded, the hour had come
for the mid-day meal, at which all the
members of my family assembled. But I
hurried forth, as soon as the grace after
meals had been said, to ascertain what
had been the fate of the Nazarene. I
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>could not go to the place of execution, for
it is not seemly for a member of the Sanhedrim
to attend an execution. I soon
learnt that the Roman soldiers had conducted
Jesus and the two others to the
Hill Golgotha, somewhat apart from the
place of stoning, where our Jewish executions
were held.
</p>

<p>
As I have explained to thee, Aglaophonos,
our Sages have mercifully interpreted
the words of the Law relating to
the four modes of capital punishment
among us—stoning, burning, beheading,
and strangulation. For stoning they have
substituted throwing down from a height
after the criminal has been made to feel
naught by drinking a mixture of frankincense,
myrrh, and vinegar, which the
ladies of Jerusalem supply as one of their
pious duties. The criminal condemned
to be burnt is in reality strangled, and
then a lighted wick placed for a moment
in his open mouth. In every way the
aim of the Sages is to shorten the sufferings
of the condemned man. But the
Romans, at least in their execution of all
but Roman citizens, seem rather to aim at
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>the opposite of this; for they have selected,
as their method of execution for
slaves and criminals that are not citizens,
suspension on a cross, by which all the
organs of the body are strained and tortured
till some vital organ gives way.
It was this cruel form of punishment that
the Romans were dealing out to Jesus the
Nazarene. It happeneth oft that men live
for two or three days on the cross, till
they die even of hunger. I learnt to my
dismay that Jesus had refused, with words
of menace, to take the draught of myrrh
and wine which the ladies of Jerusalem,
as I have said, prepare for all men condemned
to capital punishment, so that
they may not feel the pain and torture.
</p>

<p>
I could not go to the place of execution,
as a member of the Sanhedrim. I hurried,
therefore, to the northern slopes of the
Temple mount, whence one can see Golgotha.
At first I could discern naught,
for sombre clouds covered all the heights
of Scopus. But suddenly a flash came
forth from them, followed by a dull roll of
thunder, and I could see for a moment
three crosses raised side by side on the
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>top of Golgotha. Which of these held
Jesus I knew not. I only knew that there
was dying one who had seemed born to
do honor to his nation, to help to deliver
Israel from the men who were now torturing
him to his death. Since the night before,
events had so hurried past me that I
had had no time to think of their import till
now, when I sat me down in the purple
shadow of Antonia, and gazed upon the
hill of execution, where from time to time
flashes showed me the three crosses on
the hill.
</p>

<p>
This, then, was the end of the hopes
connected with Jesus of Nazara, and of
the empire which he had wielded over
men’s minds! But five days agone welcomed
as a king, to-day executed with the
ignominy reserved for the basest slave.
Each day of his sojourn in Jerusalem he
had made another and yet another class of
the nation his enemies. First he threatens
the power of the priests; next he insults
their opposites, the Pharisees; and then he
puts to naught the hope of the common
folk that he would help them rise against
the Romans. Between Sabbath and
Sab<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>bath he had lost every friend; not even
his immediate followers stood by his side
in the hour of trial.
</p>

<p>
And yet no man had appeared in Israel
for many generations endowed in so high
a degree with all the qualities which mark
us Israelites out from the nations around.
He was tender to the poor; and which of
the nations has given thought for its poor,
their feelings as well as their welfare, like
unto Israel? He bare the yoke of the
Law willingly, yet as a son, not as a slave,
of the Most High. God was to him, as
to all of us, as an ever-present Father, to
love, to chasten, and to reward; not as a
harsh taskmaster or as a boon-companion,
as with the commoner minds of thy people,
Aglaophonos; nor as a vain figment
of the reason, as with thy higher minds.
</p>

<p>
Even in what thou regardest as defects
in our nation, this Jesus seemed also to
share. Thou makest us the reproach that
we give no thought to the beauties and
grandeur of nature, and in nothing that I
had seen and heard of him did the Nazarene
differ from the rest of us in this.
Thou complainest that we look upon life
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>with all too much seriousness. <q>Ye cannot
see the smile upon the face of things,</q>
thou saidst once to me. In this surely
Jesus was a Jew of the Jews. We never
saw him smile, still less heard him laugh.
Thou wouldst hold up to me as a model
Socrates thy teacher, who taught the Hellenes
truth with a smile. That man there,
dying upon the cross, had tried to teach
Israel the truth with tears and threats.
</p>

<p>
Herein he followed the exemplar of our
prophets. Only in Israel have the men
who have led us farthest reviled us most.
As our God, who has been to us a Father,
has chastened us while he loved us, so our
prophets have rebuked us their brethren.
Many generations of men have passed
since the last of the prophets spake his
words of loving reproof. Now has appeared
this Jesus, who again takes up
their work.
</p>

<p>
But in one thing, and that a great thing,
he differs from our prophets. All these
spake never but as messengers of the Most
High. This man alone of the prophets
speaketh in his own name: therefore he
hath been a stumbling-block and an
of<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>fence unto us. He spake as one having
authority, and it seemed to us as arrogance.
And when we would speak with
him in the gates, and know his own
thought, he evaded our questionings and
eluded our testings. He seemed aloof
from us and our desires. All Israel was
pining to be freed from the Roman yoke,
and he would have us pay tribute to Rome
for aye. Did he feel himself in some way
as not of our nation? I know not; but
in all ways we failed to know him.
</p>

<p>
And as I was communing thus, the sun
shone forth from a rift in the clouds and
illumined for a space the crown of Calvary,
and I stretched forth my hands to the figures
on the cross, and cried aloud in my
perplexity, <q>Jesus, what art thou?</q> And
then I bethought me, and my hands fell
to my side, and I said, <q>What wert thou,
Jesus?</q> Naught answered me but the
distant rumbling from the gloomy clouds.
</p>

<p>
But the sun was setting over Israel, and
I turned to my father’s house, there once
more to celebrate the Feast of the Deliverance
from Egypt.
</p>

</div><div rend="page-break-before: always">
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
<index index="toc" level1="Epilogue"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Epilogue"/>
<head>EPILOGUE.</head>

<p>
Thus far had I written to thee, Aglaophonos,
as to what I knew of that Jesus
the Nazarene about whom thou hast made
so earnest inquiry. I had minded to hand
it to Alphæus ben Simon, my cousin, who
goeth this week in the galley to Cyprus,
and thence would have passed it on to
thee by the hands of one of our brethren
who visit Greece from year to year. But
there has happened to me an event which
has given me much to think of with regard
to this very matter of Jesus. It chanced
that the day before yesterday I went from
the Jewish quarter in this city of Alexandria
for my usual walk along the Lochias,
which adjoins it. There it is my custom
to catch the sea air and to watch the vessels
put into the Inner Port. Now, it
chanced that as I came upon the Lochias,
the vessel of Joppa had just hoved-to in
the Inner Port, and the passengers were
being landed up the Broad Steps. Now
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>these, by their <foreign rend='italic'>talith</foreign> and their faces, I
knew to be Jews, and I went up to them,
and greeted them with the greeting of
peace. But among them one came to me
with the look of recognition in his eyes,
and said, <q>Knowest thou me not, Meshullam
ben Zadok?</q> And, behold, it was
Rufus ben Simon, whom I had known
before I left the Holy City. So I welcomed
him, and brought him home to this
house of mine. And here he remaineth
till the morrow, when he starteth forth to
go to Cyrene.
</p>

<p>
Now, in my inquiries about old friends
left behind, and new things that had happened
since I went away, I failed not to
ask about the followers of the Nazarene.
To my wonder, I found that this Rufus
had become one of them, even though he
was but a child when Jesus died. Yet is
he a good Jew in all else. He eateth only
our meat, and keepeth our Sabbaths and
festivals. But he avers that the Anointed
One, whom we expect, has already appeared,
and that he was Jesus the Nazarene.
And upon my inquiry how he could
know aught of Jesus but from the common
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>talk, he put in my hand some Memorabilia
of him, written down in Hebrew by one of
his chief followers, Matathias.<note place="foot">Probably the so-called Primitive Gospel, the common
foundation of our Synoptics. But the date is somewhat
early.—<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ed.</hi></note> This have
I read again and again, and pondered much
thereon. Nor have I been able to sleep
these two nights for the new thoughts
about Jesus that have come to me from
reading these memoirs of him.
</p>

<p>
For, behold, he appeareth in these records
of him by his own followers in far
other wise than he showed himself to us in
public at Jerusalem. In all his public acts
among us he was full of scornful rebukes;
among his own followers he was tender
and loving. Scarcely ever could we get
him to speak out to us plainly his views
about matters of public concern. He
would always give us an answer full of
evasion and enigma, but to his followers
he would explain all his meaning over and
over again, illustrated with parable. There
at Jerusalem he almost always turned to
the people his harsher side. I saw him on
every occasion on which he appeared in
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>public in Jerusalem, and, save only in his
sermons, he was always rebuking one or
another, just like the prophets of old. And
the manner of his rebuking towards us was
as with scorpions, whereas among his own
he would mingle tenderness even with his
reproaches. Nor, saving his sermons,
which few heard but those who already
followed him, had he aught novel to tell us
about the things of life. He seemed to us
as if he would destroy the temple of our
faith, nor in his public actions did he give
any promise of building it up anew. Yet
to those with him he would continually be
telling what to do and how to do it, till,
behold, a new manner of life, fair and
seemly, stood before them, fulfilled of Jewish
righteousness, with a tender mercy
which was the man’s very own.
</p>

<p>
I need not detail to thee, Aglaophonos,
what these acts and words were which have
given me an altogether new light as to the
character and thoughts of the man Jesus.
From certain words of thine in thy letter,
which I understood not then when I first
read it, I can see now that thou must have
had some such account of the life and
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>death of Jesus before thee as this which
Rufus hath shown unto me. Now I can
understand wherefore thou hast inquired
about this Jesus with such eager insistence.
And to thee as a Gentile the revelation of
his character would come with more attractive
force than to us that be Jews. For in
almost every way this Jesus fulfilleth the
idea of a Jew as we have it in these later
days. Working with his hands, yet teaching
with his voice; obedient to the Law,
yet ever eager to take a new law upon himself;
doing acts of love among men, yet
rebuking in love their ill acts, and doing
all things as in the presence of the Glory;—in
all this Jesus was as the best of our
Sages.
</p>

<p>
<q>Wherefore, then, did ye suffer him to
be killed?</q> thou wilt ask me, and indeed
I ask myself. If I were to answer thee
in the way Jesus was wont to answer us,
I would say, <q>Why did ye Hellenes condemn
Socrates to the hemlock?</q> For he
was as much the Ideal of the Hellenes as
Jesus of the Jews. Every Hellene would
be eloquent and reasonable, and that was
Socrates. Every Jew would be wise and
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>good and pious, and that was Jesus. Yet
each of these men, if I read their lives
aright, died the death of a criminal, because
he cared not for that which his fellow-countrymen
cared for most. Socrates died
because he would force his countrymen to
examine by their reason the ideas and ideals
which they all accepted. Jesus died for
the same reason, but also for another—for
that he cared naught for our national
hopes. We were all panting for national
freedom; he would have naught of it.
Whether it was that he felt in some sort
to be not of our nation, I know not; but
in all his teaching he dealt with us as men,
not as Jews. It is this, I can see, that has
attracted thee to his doctrine, whereas thou
wert always scornful of our Jewish pretensions,
as thou calledst them.
</p>

<p>
Yet herein again was he at one with the
best thoughts of our Sages. Our God is
the God of all, and his Law shall be one
day the Law of all. If we yearn for the
universal realm of the Messiah, it is as
much for the sake of the world as for ourselves.
But methinks I see in the thoughts
of this Jesus an idea quite other than ours
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>as to what the Anointed One shall be
and shall do. We hope for him as a Deliverer
and a Conqueror with force of arms
by God’s aid. Now, Jesus seemed not to
think of the Anointed One in any way
like this. His mind seemed to be filled
rather with the picture of the Servant of
God as drawn by the Prophet Esaias.
Thou knowest the passage, Aglaophonos;
I remember thy laughter when first I read
it thee, that men could look forward to
contempt and hatred as a good. Truly the
idea is far different from the saying of the
barbarian, <q>Woe to the conquered!</q> And
surely to us all, Jew and Gentile, Greek and
barbarian, the greatest of joys is this—to
worst an equal foe in fair fight. But to
Esaias the prophet, and to Jesus the Nazarene
after him, the higher victory is with
him that is worsted in the battle of life.
That will come as good tidings to nine out
of every ten of men.
</p>

<p>
Therefore, if Jesus thought of himself as
the Anointed One, it was as being anointed
with the woes of the vanquished, with the
sweat and the blood of the lowly and despised.
Now I know why he seemed so
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>sad when he was greeted at Jerusalem as
a victor. He had spent his life in trying
to impress a new ideal upon his people,
and they had welcomed him only as the
fulfilment of the old ideal which he desired
to replace. None of thy poets have given
a drama with more of <foreign rend='italic'>eironeia</foreign> in it than
this.
</p>

<p>
Yet why did he remain silent before us
as to these ideas of his? If, indeed, these
were his ideas; for even with the new
light given by the Hebrew Memorabilia, I
can see his thought but dimly. Why
spake he not his own thought to the
people in Jerusalem, and tell us no longer
to hope for worldly dominion as the best
means for spreading the Law of the Lord,
but rather to be as servants of God, even
as Esaias the Prophet hath spoken? Was
it that he wished to carry out the description
of the prophet even to every iota of
his text? For, behold, the prophet sayeth,
<q>He let himself be humbled, and
opened not his mouth.</q> If so, then was
the death of Jesus but a sublime suicide.
</p>

<p>
For surely by this silence he has committed
a grievous sin against us his people.
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>For if we committed aught of sin and
crime that handed him over to the
Romans as a pretender to empire, he
indeed shared our sin and crime by his
silence. Ye Hellenes were at least
greater in fault than we in the matter of
Socrates; for ye condemned him after he
had spoken his whole mind and made
known his whole thought to his people;
whereas we condemned one who, I make
bold to say, was even greater than thy
Socrates, mainly because of what seemed
to us his sullen and arrogant silence,
broken only by a confession of guilt when
he knew he was not guilty.
</p>

<p>
But yet, let me not be as harsh in judgment
upon him after his death, as perhaps
I was when I allowed the sentence to be
declared against him without protest. He,
least of all men, could have died with a lie
upon his lips. In some sort and in some
way he must have combined the thought
of the triumphant Messiah and of the
despised Servant of God. For in those
Memorabilia of him which have come into
my hands during the last days as being
a message from him that is dead, I find
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>these two things combined. He speaketh
ever of the blessedness of the poor and
the humble and the despised, even as
the Ebionim speak. So that if a man
would be blessed, he would choose a
lowly career, even as did Jesus. Yet
withal he speaketh oft of himself as the
Son of Man, and every Jew that heard
him would think he knew what he thereby
claimed. For in the Prophets Daniel and
Enoch it is clearly said that the Son of
Man would come in victory over the
world; and what other could this universal
victor be than the Anointed One whom
the prophets had foretold? If Jesus put
another meaning upon the prophetic
words, why spake he not his meaning
fully unto the people? All we may have
gone like sheep astray, but he that might
have been our shepherd went apart alone
with God.
</p>

<p>
O Jesus, why didst thou not show thyself
to thy people in thy true character?
Why didst thou seem to care not for aught
that we at Jerusalem cared for? Why,
arraigned before the appointed judges of
thy people, didst thou keep silence before
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>us, and, by thus keeping silent, share in
pronouncing judgment upon thyself? We
have slain thee as the Hellenes have slain
Socrates their greatest, and our punishment
will be as theirs. Then will Israel
be even as thou wert, despised and rejected
of men—a nation of sorrows among the
nations. But Israel is greater than any of
his sons, and the day will come when he
will know thee as his greatest. And in
that day he will say unto thee, <q>My sons
have slain thee, O my son, and thou hast
shared our guilt.</q>
</p>

<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>

        </div></body>
        <back rend="page-break-before: right">
<div><pb/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
<index index="toc" level1="Religious Books"/>
<index index="pdf" level1="Religious Books"/>
<head>RELIGIOUS BOOKS</head>

<p rend="center; font-size: large">
<hi rend='italic'>Serviceable, Timely, and Helpful.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Riverside Parallel Bible.</hi><lb/>
<hi rend="font-size: small">Containing the Authorized Version and the Revised Version in
parallel columns. Large type, cloth, $5.00; Persian, $10.00;
morocco, $15.00.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bible Dictionary.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
Dr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Smith’s Great Bible Dictionary</hi>. Edited for America
by Professor <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hackett</hi> and Dr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ezra Abbot</hi>. By far the fullest
and best Bible Dictionary in the English language. 4 vols.
8vo, 596 illustrations, 3697 pages, cloth, $20.00. Other bindings
from $25.00 to $27.50.
</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The New Testament.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
Superbly illustrated with engravings from designs after the Old
Masters. Royal 4to, cloth, full gilt, $10.00; morocco, $20.00.
</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Robinson’s Palestine.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
Biblical Researches in Palestine. By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Edward Robinson</hi>. A
work very highly commended by Dean Stanley. With Maps,
plans, etc. 3 vols. 8vo, $10.00.
</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Physical Geography of the Holy Land.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
8vo, $3.50.
</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Sacred Scriptures of the New Testament.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
Probably the fullest and best work on this subject. By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Eduard
W. E. Reuss</hi>. Translated by <hi rend='smallcaps'>E. L. Houghton</hi>. 2 vols. 8vo,
$5.00.
</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Neander’s Church History.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
General History of the Christian Religion and Church. Translated
by Rev. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Joseph Torrey</hi>. With a very full index. 6 vols.
8vo, $20.00.<lb/>Dr. Schaff pronounced Neander the greatest church historian of
the nineteenth century.
</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Into His Marvellous Light.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
Studies in Life and Belief. By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Charles Cuthbert Hall</hi>,
D. D., of Brooklyn. $1.50.<lb/>The London <hi rend='italic'>Christian World</hi> pronounces these discourses
<q>most inspiring,</q> and the <hi rend='italic'>Christian Intelligencer</hi> finds <q>a rare
keenness of insight, a reflection of taste that is special, a spirit
that is most Christian pervading the whole book.</q>
</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Divinity of Jesus Christ.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
By the Editors of the <hi rend='italic'>Andover Review</hi>. A series of noteworthy
papers contributed to that Review, and forming a symmetrical
and very interesting treatment of the great topic they discuss.
16mo, $1.00.
</hi>
</p>

<pb/><anchor id='Pg220'/>

<p><hi rend='italic'>The Evolution of Christianity.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
The remarkable Lectures at the Lowell Institute, in 1892, by
Dr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Lyman Abbott</hi>. Thoroughly revised, and forming a book
which the <hi rend='italic'>Christian Register</hi> says, <q>for the breadth of its sympathies,
for the generosity of its inclusions, for the largeness of its
spiritual apprehensions, can hardly be too highly praised.</q> $1.25.
</hi></p>

<p><hi rend='italic'>The World to Come.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
A book of vigorous, very readable discourses by Dr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>William
Burnett Wright</hi>, with a Lecture full of curious information
about Christmas ($1.25); <q><hi rend='italic'>Ancient Cities</hi>,</q> a volume of popular
character, describing the most representative cities of the Bible
($1.25).
</hi></p>

<p><hi rend='italic'>On the Threshold.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
Dr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Munger’s</hi> wise and delightful book for young men and women
($1.00); <q><hi rend='italic'>Freedom of Faith</hi></q> and <q><hi rend='italic'>The Appeal to Life</hi>,</q> two
books of broad, noble, readable sermons ($1.50 each), and <q><hi rend='italic'>Lamps
and Paths</hi>,</q> a volume of exceedingly sensible and attractive sermons
to children ($1.00).
</hi></p>

<p><hi rend='italic'>Who Wrote the Bible?</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
Dr. Gladden’s frank, scholarly, yet popular book, treating wisely
and reverently a very important question ($1.25); a book of admirable
discourses on <q><hi rend='italic'>The Lord’s Prayer</hi></q> ($1.00), and <q><hi rend='italic'>Applied
Christianity</hi>,</q> treating very suggestively the moral aspects
of social questions ($1.25).
</hi></p>

<p><hi rend='italic'>The Lily Among Thorns.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
A very interesting book on the Biblical drama called The Song of
Songs. By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Wm. Elliot Griffis</hi>, D. D. $1.25.
</hi></p>

<p><hi rend='italic'>An American Missionary in Japan.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
A book of great interest, and giving a great deal of information
about the social and religious development of Modern Japan. By
Rev. Dr. <hi rend='smallcaps'>M. L. Gordon</hi>, for twenty years an able and devoted
missionary in that country. $1.25.
</hi></p>

<p><hi rend='italic'>The Republic of God.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
By <hi rend='smallcaps'>Elisha Mulford</hi>, LL. D. $2.00. <q>A unique work, and
devotes to the great topics of theology a kind of thinking of which
we have had little in English literature and need much.</q>—<hi rend='italic'>The
Independent.</hi>
</hi></p>

<p><hi rend='italic'>As It Is In Heaven.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The Unseen Friend.</hi> 
<hi rend='italic'>At the Beautiful Gate.</hi><lb/><hi rend="font-size: small">
Three books by <hi rend='smallcaps'>Lucy Larcom</hi>,—religious, cheerful, delightful
to read, and of the finest quality in every way. The last-named is
a book of exquisite religious lyrics. Each, $1.00.
</hi></p>

<p rend="font-size: small">
⁂ <hi rend='italic'>For sale by all Booksellers. Sent, post-paid, on receipt of price by the
Publishers</hi>,
</p>

<p rend="center"><hi rend='italic'><hi rend="font-size: large">Houghton, Mifflin &amp; Company,</hi>
<lb/>4 Park Street, Boston; 11 East 17th Street, New York.</hi></p>
</div>
<div>
        <pgIf output="pdf">
        <then/>
        <else>
        <div id="footnotes" rend="page-break-before: right">
        <index index="toc" level1="Footnotes"/>
        <head>Footnotes</head>
        <divGen type="footnotes"/>
        </div>
        </else>
        </pgIf>
        </div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
        <divGen type="pgfooter"/>
        </div>
        </back>
    </text>
</TEI.2>
